### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-26)
**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:00:00):**  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com slash course, or in the links below.  Now onto the podcast.  In this interview, me and Benedict discuss something rarely covered, which honestly  surprises me constantly.  The profitability of regenerative and non regenerative farmers.  
**[0:00:18-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:00:18):**  And does a farmer really need transition finance to start or to speed up their  regenerative transition?  Find out more about this in the next video.  As we dig deeper, pun definitely intended, into the connection between farm  profitability and regenerative agriculture practices.  
**[0:00:41-0:00:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:00:41):**  Welcome to investing in regenerative agriculture and food.  This is a special dedicated series on transition finance.  Why are we recording this video?  Well, because we're going to be talking about the future of agriculture.  This is a dedicated series on transition finance.  
**[0:00:56-0:00:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:00:56):**  Why are we recording this series?  Many farmers are ready to speed up their regenerative transition.  They've looked for learning, done the courses, read the key books, hosted the  gurus on their farms, explored farm size regenerative designs, and most  importantly, started their pilots and feedback loops.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:01:12):**  This is where transition finance is key.  A local bank loan often isn't feasible because of the short duration, lack of  flexibility and the farmers lack of collateral.  Furthermore, there's a limit of how much equity a farmer is able or willing to  give away.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:01:27):**  That is why my cohost aspiring to be regenerative farmer, Benedict  Boesl, and I are embarking on a journey to find out what are the key principles  of transition finance for regenerative farmers.  We are interviewing leading practitioners in the regenerative  agriculture and food finance space.  
**[0:01:45-0:01:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:01:45):**  They shared our insights, how they would finance the speed up of the regenerative  agriculture and food finance space, and their vision on Benedict's 1000  hectares, which is almost two and a half thousand acres farm in Germany, close to  Berlin.  This is an open process.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:02:00):**  We are sharing our lessons through the podcast episodes as we go along.  We don't have the answers yet, just a lot of questions.  So please share with us any examples of transition finance you've seen, other  inspiration, people to interview, et cetera.  Get in touch via the contact page on the website, investing in regenerative  
**[0:02:17-0:02:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:02:17):**  agriculture.com.  Welcome Nicholas for spirit, the co-founder of soil capital.  And of course, welcome Benedict Boesl, my cohost.  Hello.  Hi, I'm looking forward to this discussion as we are taking it back to the farm and  
**[0:02:31-0:02:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:02:31):**  diving a bit deeper in what a regenerative transition means.  Both obviously for the farmer Benedict, but also for a lot of farms.  Our guest has seen in his experience and we're very much looking forward to dive a  bit deeper into that.  So first of all, I think Nicholas, could you briefly introduce yourself?  
**[0:02:47-0:02:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:02:47):**  And so capital, I mean, we've had you actually in a short interview, which we  recorded live in groundswell last year, which is not happening this year, but just  a brief introduction into your background.  So we know who you are and then we're going to unpack a bit of farming business.  Yes.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:03:01):**  So I am agronomist and we are based in Belgium.  I've been passionate about farming since I'm very, very young and I'm involved in,  in what we call the regenerative agriculture for the last let's say 15, 20  years with my partners here in Belgium, where we are farming, but also now with  the soil capital team that we founded with my colleague, my partner five years ago.  
**[0:03:28-0:03:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:03:28):**  So basically I'm working in the field as a farmer here in Belgium and as an agronomist  outside of Belgium with a soil capital team.  And just a brief, I mean, I will share the article you just published or just, I  think a month ago published on farming, profitability, regenerative agriculture  with, with actually a number of farmers that you're working with in Belgium.  
**[0:03:52-0:03:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:03:52):**  Can you give a very brief stint of where you are now with soil capital?  What is soil capital?  We're speaking April, 2020.  What is soil capital currently busy with?  We are still focused on how to scale regenerative agriculture across the world.  
**[0:04:09-0:04:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:04:09):**  If I may say how we can participate to that development.  We are still involved in several operations, helping farm managers to  transition the farm into regenerative agriculture, Latin America, Europe,  a little bit in Africa as well.  And we are for the last few months, as you were referring to the article we  
**[0:04:28-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:04:28):**  published a few weeks ago, also trying to explore ways to measure better the way  farmers are performing economically.  And also with another indicator, which is the carbon to understand how the farmers  are able to transition their farm economically and also regarding the  carbon balance, we are now working on the tool to help farmers and agronomists to  
**[0:04:53-0:04:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:04:53):**  understand where they are and how they can improve, how they can grow their  farm, how they can improve, how they can benchmark themselves against the local  community and how to give them guidelines to transition their farm.  So that's one of the focus for the moment with part of the team.  And if I remember correctly from the article, there was a very interesting  
**[0:05:13-0:05:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:05:13):**  connection, not saying correlation, but connection between the profitability  and the carbon levels, like the farms that had the highest carbon levels in  their soil also were the most profitable.  The two are connected, but we don't know what causes what or what other  variables are at play, but at least it shows that the question that everybody  
**[0:05:32-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:05:32):**  asks constantly, can this be done profitably?  Yeah.  So this is really our guideline at Soil Capital.  We are strongly convinced that we can farm more profitably while doing good for  nature and storing carbon in the soil.  
**[0:05:49-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:05:49):**  It is clear that this is maybe not the easiest way, but what shows the first  results now with around 50, 60 farms that we are working with and that we're  analyzing with this tool is that most of the time, the farms who are the most  profitable are also the most successful at sequestering carbon.  It's not always the case, but it means that there are ways to do it.  
**[0:06:15-0:06:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:06:15):**  And this is where we are really interested.  We want to understand better those farms.  We want to also to make those techniques, those examples available for the others.  Let me just jump in there real quick, because I think this is such a crucial  point you mentioned, you know, the question always is if it's so good and  
**[0:06:33-0:06:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:06:33):**  valuable, why isn't everyone doing it?  From the experience that you have speaking to so many farmers, what would  you say, what are like the biggest barriers to entry for those farmers  starting the transition to more regenerative ways, let's say?  I think that there are many reasons, but the main reason for me and for us at  
**[0:06:53-0:06:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:06:53):**  Sol Capital, it's the money, the profitability.  I think that the most of the farmers in Europe or in the other continents are  struggling, the margin are very thin.  And so any additional risk or additional changes that you bring to the farm is  putting a high risk on the margin, on the salary of the farmer.  
**[0:07:15-0:07:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:07:15):**  And so this is why we really believed that there is a strong connection  between the capability of a farmer to change and the guarantee or his  capability also to generate more revenue, more margin, more profit.  For me, it's a big bottleneck.  So we are working mostly on the farm and not on the market.  
**[0:07:37-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:07:37):**  So we believe that farmer and the farming operation can be transitioned  into regenerative agriculture only if the economics are improved from day one.  We already discussed that with Koon a few times, and if we want to scale  this kind of farming practices, we need to find ways to make it profitable  on a very short term.  
**[0:07:59-0:08:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:07:59):**  And we can discuss that after, if you want to understand how to make it.  Yeah, I think that would be great.  I mean, people would listen to this and say, yeah, but you just said  their profitability is so low.  Now, farmers on most continents you're working on are struggling.  
**[0:08:13-0:08:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:08:13):**  The margins are very thin in depth in this policy changes,  a lot of different things.  So if we don't wait for a market to change in the sense that we start  paying more for certain types of regenerative grain or certain types,  which is a lot of discussions are happening on that space, you say, okay,  
**[0:08:29-0:08:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:08:29):**  let's take it as a given that that's not happening yet, or it would be great  if it does, but we cannot control that.  So how then do you transition a farmer that is struggling that might be  listening to this or somebody that knows a farmer that is listening to this?  What are the steps?  
**[0:08:42-0:08:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:08:42):**  What are the first steps you obviously generalizing?  Because it depends on the context, but what are central things you  themes you always see coming back?  If you work with a farmer in Argentina or you work with a farmer in Belgium?  Nicholas, before you answer this question, let me just jump in right there,  
**[0:08:56-0:09:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:08:56):**  because there's one overall question that lies basically above this.  And it's a, you can only answer the yes or no, please.  This is the task, but everything considered, we just said, and what you're  going to answer respective questions.  Do you think, do you believe farmers need transition finance?  
**[0:09:17-0:09:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:09:17):**  Yes or no?  No.  That's what I was hearing.  You might say, but no, that's the central theme of the podcast.  We're not saying you're sure if you take it probably because we do a,  
**[0:09:29-0:09:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:09:29):**  a podcast series on transition finance, because it is a question  that is my concern as well.  You know, there's, I have two hearts in my chest if you want, but Nicholas,  I'd be really interested to hear what, how you would answer questions, because  I think they're very really fundamental.  
**[0:09:45-0:09:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:09:45):**  But I just wanted to get that one out.  You pushed me to answer one word and of course this is impossible.  This is very restrictive.  I would say that on my end, I strongly believe that you can  transition without extended finance.  
**[0:09:56-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:09:56):**  That's more.  The answer we also understand that if you want to transition massively and fast,  that money is necessary to push, to help farmers who don't have the enough  confidence, enough support, enough whatever.  So yeah, you understand behind this answer.  
**[0:10:14-0:10:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:10:14):**  So what would be the steps then if let's say, let's take it as a given that  hypothetical farmer doesn't want to take or cannot take, or is not confident to  take outside capital, which is not a good idea, but it's not a good idea to  take, what's your approach again, depending on the context, but what are  some, some general approaches you usually use?  
**[0:10:33-0:10:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:10:33):**  Yeah, I think that it's also coming from maybe from the character of the farmers  who are normally very independent and self-sustaining.  And this is why we are coming from this world also.  And this is why there is a big part of myself who hate to be supported by  somebody else to transition, to do something, to develop your own business,  
**[0:10:55-0:10:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:10:55):**  to make changes.  So we've been educated with the subsidy from the European Union  and we see where we are now.  So this massive amount of money that has been spent with, on my view, not enough  changes and nearly no changes on the ground.  
**[0:11:10-0:11:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:11:10):**  So this is why I'm afraid when you talk about financing external  hands coming to help the farmer.  And this is why our reflex in our company at the beginning and still now is always  what are the internal solutions that we can find in the farm with the farmer,  with an independent agronomist, helping the farmer to think and to work on the  
**[0:11:35-0:11:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:11:35):**  business more than in the business.  And the main lever that we have today are the agrochemicals and the external inputs  that are purchased by the farmers.  And in most of the farm that we are working with, I would say  that this is always the case.  
**[0:11:51-0:11:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:11:51):**  There is an overuse, it's maybe not the right word, but the usage of this  external input, the inputs that are purchased by the farmers are not efficient.  And this is where you can start tapping into trying to get additional dollars or  euro, recovering some additional euros and dollars to start financing your own  transition.  
**[0:12:15-0:12:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:12:15):**  So agrochemicals or external inputs are the first one where you can, from our  experience, start saving some money.  Yeah, I think it's a crucial point you're making.  Many farmers, I mean, there are two very crucial points.  First of all, is that independent agronomists and obviously that's connected  
**[0:12:32-0:12:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:12:32):**  to the input because they are selling that in many countries, some countries  that's actually, they're starting to decouple that, but many farmers, when we  talk about farmers, we never talk about their agronomists, but many times they are  a team.  And if the farmer wants to do something and the agronomist doesn't agree or the  
**[0:12:47-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:12:47):**  other way around, it's very difficult to get any changes.  And if you don't have an independent agronomist, obviously they must be paid  by someone, meaning they're paid by the input companies.  And I always see it as, I don't know, Shell or any other oil companies going to  help me save petrol or like, look, we're selling you something that you're going  
**[0:13:05-0:13:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:13:05):**  to use less of that probably doesn't happen.  So that means that there's extra space.  Like they're selling you extra inputs if they want it or not, then maybe they use  a recipe that's not perfect for your farm.  So you're saying there is always space or they seem to be usually space in  
**[0:13:19-0:13:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:13:19):**  the inputs that are coming into the farm.  And that's the first lever you have to reduce that without hurting your yields  and thus reducing your costs basically directly and thus having some extra  space, some extra margin, some extra money in the bank that you can use for, for  pilots, for your regenerative transition financed by yourself.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:13:37):**  Right.  I think you're explaining that much better than me.  There is another point also, because to convince a farmer that he could use his  inputs more efficiently, it's tough because there is in general, a relationship  of dependency or trust also history between the farmer and his advisor.  
**[0:13:58-0:14:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:13:58):**  And the farmers, because he's in a risky situation in a very low margin business,  he has is in general, very reluctant to change any of the  ingredients that he has around him.  He knows that if he's changing something, there is a high risk that the plus  five percent of margin or the plus three percent of margin he's doing will be  
**[0:14:18-0:14:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:14:18):**  transformed into a minus two or three or five very quickly.  So by definition in a situation where he's afraid to change any of those  ingredients, and one of the things, this is why we are working now focusing on  dashboard on metrics more than ever is that the farmers in terms of economic  doesn't have a clear view on what's happening on the farm.  
**[0:14:42-0:14:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:14:42):**  The farm is a complex system with a lot of interactions and the farmer is also  super busy at making the operation going well.  The paperwork has been increased more and more the last few years.  So there are a lot of farmers who doesn't know about their production costs.  They know about the yields, they know about the accurate, they know about many  
**[0:15:04-0:15:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:15:04):**  things, but when it comes to calculate and to really understand the production  costs and to with the idea to benchmark that and to have a discussion with others  to understand where they are, to understand where they can improve, it's very rare.  And so this is where we are working now, trying to define and to help the farmer  to understand better his figures, economical figures first and operational figures after.  
**[0:15:29-0:15:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:15:29):**  But could you go a bit more into depth to the actual discussion you have with the  farmer, basically you drive on the farm, you have a tour, you discuss certain  things and try to get a feeling and understanding of the process and system  that that particular farmer is running.  But how is the talk developing between the two of you?  
**[0:15:49-0:15:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:15:49):**  How are you trying to convince them?  How are you trying to change his thinking?  Because I mean, this is what in the end of the day is, right?  I mean, you can tell him, look, you can really reduce this and that, and this  might have this or that effect, but doesn't he really have to kind of experience  
**[0:16:04-0:16:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:16:04):**  it and see it and live through it in order to then be open to changing  you or taking that risk.  Can you explain a bit more on that, the actual process of talking and  communicating with the farm and convincing, I guess?  Yeah.  
**[0:16:16-0:16:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:16:16):**  So maybe we are fortunate for the moment to work with farmers who are coming to us  with this first step of being convinced that something has to be done is already done.  Is this already achieved?  Thanks to people like Coon or others, we're trying to explain and to communicate  to farmers and other people of the community, what's happening and the benefit.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:16:40):**  There are now more and more people who are questioning their system.  So I think that's one thing.  Step one is done.  Yeah.  Something needs to change, but then the question is what and how?  
**[0:16:50-0:16:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:16:50):**  Yeah.  Most of the time we don't have to preach and then start convincing.  Luckily, because that's very tiring.  Yeah.  But it doesn't mean that it's easy because as I was saying, the economical situation,  
**[0:17:00-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:17:00):**  balance of the farm is most of the time, I would say always very tight.  So the margin is not important.  But again, the first discussion that we have with the farmer, it's a very simple  discussion about economics and say, okay, you know about the principle  of regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:17:19-0:17:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:17:19):**  We know that we have to limit the tillage.  We know that we have to cover the soil and blah, blah, blah.  This is quite clear for everybody.  How can we start implementing some of those principles into your farm  without adding additional costs?  
**[0:17:33-0:17:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:17:33):**  And one of the principles of the regenerative agriculture, again, it's  trying to decrease, to optimise the usage of agrochemical.  We know that fungicide, insecticides in particular, are  damageable for the soil and the ecosystem and the biodiversity.  So this is the first discussion we have.  
**[0:17:53-0:17:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:17:53):**  What sort of fungicide, what sort of insecticides are you using on your farm?  And as I was saying just before, this is the first way to optimise because I can  say that in most of the case, we can start saving by just using those  input better between 10 and 30, 40% of those agrochemicals.  So that's the first step.  
**[0:18:15-0:18:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:18:15):**  So just to summarise, you're saying that most farms you need to  meet are overusing or not using efficiently.  So they could save between 10 and 30 to 40% of their chemical input,  insecticides and fungicide, which is a lot of money because that's cash  out of the door in a second, basically.  
**[0:18:34-0:18:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:18:34):**  And these are farmers that are already aware of soil, et cetera.  So they're probably not even the ones that are wasting the most.  And it's coming from different factors.  So you have first the way you're using the pesticides.  And I know that it can be shocking for people listening about regenerative  
**[0:18:47-0:18:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:18:47):**  agriculture wants to go into regenerative agriculture, who have been  inspired by Kuhn and the other.  The first discussion you have with an agronomist from South  Capital is to talk about the fungicide.  That's reality.  
**[0:18:58-0:18:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:18:58):**  That's where we start.  And the quality of application, the way you're applying pesticides is definitely  one of the big factors to improve it.  You would be surprised to see, to understand how many farmers today  want to change, doesn't really, haven't been informed that the  
**[0:19:16-0:19:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:19:16):**  are ways to apply those chemicals where you can really save quantity.  The quality of the water you're using, the climate when you're applying the type  of molecule that are not always the same.  That's one thing.  The second thing is the way they are purchasing because most of the farmers  
**[0:19:32-0:19:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:19:32):**  are working on a very individual base.  So they are not negotiating their price.  They are buying alone and they're not using the group effect, the group power  to buy in a more efficient way.  So we are also trying to, in places like Belgium, for example, where we have  
**[0:19:50-0:19:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:19:50):**  more farmers or in other places, to group the farmers together, to try  to help them to buy better, because this is nothing to do with the  regenerative agriculture principle, but this is also a good way  to start saving some money.  And connecting the farmers to each other.  
**[0:20:08-0:20:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:20:08):**  Yeah.  Connecting the farmers around one vision.  And by the way, you can also connect farmers in this case, who are not  interested about regenerative agriculture, but who are coming to you because  they are interested just to save money.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:20:19):**  And this is a, probably you create a good momentum to start discussing,  not only about pesticides and tenders and group purchase, but  talking about soil and soil.  And that's a second way to save money.  And once you've saved your 20 to 60, 70 euro per hectare in a grain  
**[0:20:38-0:20:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:20:38):**  operation or in Argentina or in Belgium, France, or even in Africa,  you start collecting some money.  You have a budget to start investing for the longer term.  And the longer term for me is your cover crop.  That's one thing that the farmers generally don't want to step in  
**[0:20:54-0:20:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:20:54):**  because it's an additional cost.  So most of the time they're just following the rules, the local  legislation, okay, I'm going to do a very, I'm forced in Europe to  plant some cover crops, so I'm going to do some mustard, five kilo per  hectare, 10 euros per hectare.  
**[0:21:10-0:21:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:21:10):**  And it's going to be, I'm going to be okay with the legislation, but  they will have no effect on the soil.  And with this additional money, you can, you can convince the farmers, okay,  let's invest a part of your saving that we just achieved with your chemicals  into a better cover crop, because this is something that will pay in the coming year.  
**[0:21:32-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:21:32):**  And maybe let's do it really seriously.  And let's do it only on 10% of your average with a very good multi-species  cover crop so that we push the, we increase the chance to really have a  fast payback and fast observation that you can see in the fields.  And that's a second step.  
**[0:21:57-0:22:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:21:57):**  Another part of this longer term discussion is the  term, this effect is also to start talking with the farmers about the rotation.  And most of the farmers are not producing some crop that are less profitable.  And with an additional budget that you're creating with these input savings, you  can, you can convince also the farmers, okay, let's start producing again, some  
**[0:22:24-0:22:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:22:24):**  oats or some barley or some legumes that you were not producing for the last  few years, because it's not the most profitable crop on the short term.  And let's reintroduce some of those crops on one hectare, five hectare, 10  hectares just to understand that those crops, this additional crop will have  an effect also on your soil and on your production costs on the longer term.  
**[0:22:54-0:23:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:22:54):**  So that's the way to prime the pump and to step into the journey of regenerative farming.  And the good news is that in most of the case, the farmer after one year, one  year and a half, two years, when the pump is starting to work, you don't  need to push them anymore.  They start seeing more clearly than us where their system is going.  
**[0:23:29-0:23:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:23:29):**  And most of the time they will come back to you and say, okay, actually I've  increased before you asked me the acreage of cover crop, I've started to share  some equipment with my neighbour.  And the motivation is coming back.  So that's a general average observation that we have with the different clients.  
**[0:23:49-0:23:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:23:49):**  Yeah.  I mean, thank you for that.  I think that was quite interesting because it shows the different ways to go at it.  You mentioned long-term.  So when you talk about that transition phase, what kind of time span are you thinking of?  
**[0:24:03-0:24:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:24:03):**  This is really a discussion and a depending of the people.  Because you have many farmers who are, as I was saying, not able to transition  fast because they don't want to increase the risk.  They don't have the money.  So in this case, the long-term is, I would say between three, five, seven years where  
**[0:24:34-0:24:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:24:34):**  you can really say, okay, I've been, now I'm really ticking the boxes of all the  principles of regenerative agriculture.  Even if it's not binary, there is always, it's always a little bit blur, but you can  agree that you are into this system.  Some other farmers we are working with are more interested to go faster because they  
**[0:25:08-0:25:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:25:08):**  want to finance that themselves.  So they say, okay, I understand that I'm putting my operation with a high risk.  I'm ready to finance that.  And this is maybe where external finance or additional farmers finance can help.  And then you can go faster.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:25:31):**  And I would say in three years, you can probably make big steps in this transition.  I would say that our preference in the soil capital environment ecosystem is to go, as  I was saying, without external finance, without having the farmer forced to tap into  savings, without having the farmers forced to take a high risk.  Because, yeah, of course, there are many risks around the farm, the farming system, the  
**[0:26:10-0:26:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:26:10):**  climate is there, the market as well.  And if you're not in the right moment, you can really take a serious hit if you want to  go too fast.  So, yeah, I don't know if I answered your question, but let's say three, five years.  And what we have to remember, I think, is that we don't accept the fact that those three,  
**[0:26:40-0:26:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:26:40):**  five years would be years with less profitability than the year minus one, minus two, minus  three.  So that's the main role for us.  I think this is so crucial.  And you mentioned early on that it's also about developing KPIs and having strong numbers  
**[0:27:01-0:27:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:27:01):**  to relate to and to go back to and to analyze throughout a certain time span throughout  that transition.  Because the thing is, how do you define success after a couple of years?  I mean, obviously, you have a shovel and you will probably hopefully see.  But on the economic side, if farmers are not that aware of the economics, especially  
**[0:27:20-0:27:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:27:20):**  regarding production costs, how can they actually tell?  Obviously, other than what they see outside.  And I think because what we often come across when we have visitors here, we give them  a farm tour basically and look at some of those agroforestry systems.  And most of the farmers often come around the area and they are all aware of the problems  
**[0:27:40-0:27:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:27:40):**  that we have regarding drought, regarding erosion, wind erosion, water erosion, extreme  weather conditions.  And nearly all of them say, well, I think agroforestry is amazing.  I think there's a huge potential there.  But none of them will ever start implementing anything if they don't have reliable calculations  
**[0:27:58-0:27:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:27:58):**  to work with.  So I think it's so crucial.  And in the beginning, you spoke about scaling regenerative ag.  And I mean, this is why Kun and me are doing this, because we believe we have to and we  need to, and this could be a part of it.  
**[0:28:11-0:28:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:28:11):**  But the question is the whole, the scientific as well as the numeric, how do you say, monitoring  of those processes is, I don't know how you see that, but then sometimes it's coming a  bit short.  So we need those reliable numbers.  So I think thinking about KPIs, thinking about ways of actually making that transition somehow  
**[0:28:33-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:28:33):**  be reflected in numbers and experiences.  I think that's going to be so crucial for the next couple of development phases, I guess.  Yes.  And on that point, I come back on what we're trying to develop now, this tool that we've  called Mysore Capital.  
**[0:28:50-0:28:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:28:50):**  I will link to it below in the show notes for anybody who wants to check it out.  It came from a frustration, internal frustration as well, to not being able to monitor ourselves  and to also to increase our capability to convince farmers and to drive farmers in the  right direction.  So it is a tool for the agronomist, mostly for the farm manager.  
**[0:29:17-0:29:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:29:17):**  And we've decided to oversimplify today the system and the KPIs to talk, as I was saying  first, about the cost of production and to analyze where it's good, where it's not good,  where you can improve compared to your peers.  And the second part is the carbon.  And we believe that today, in a very simplistic way, all the different KPIs of the regenerative  
**[0:29:44-0:29:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:29:44):**  agriculture principle could be summarized in this carbon balance.  We believe today it's very restrictive.  I agree.  And we are working on other metrics to make that a little bit more complete.  But we believe that if you do a carbon balance of the farm at feed level, you will have a  
**[0:30:13-0:30:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:30:13):**  very good idea of how many tons of carbon you're sequestering in your soil, basically,  because this is the only way for the farmer to sequester.  You have also, with the carbon balance, a quite good idea of what sort of intensity,  in terms of input, nitrogen use, external nitrogen you're using.  So we believe that it's a good metric.  
**[0:30:35-0:30:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:30:35):**  And this is, as you were saying, Benedict, I think we see this kind of tool of metric  very necessary to go faster, to limit the risk as well, to be able to communicate, to  be able to talk with your neighbor, to compare yourself with others, and just much better  than, of course, counting the earthworms or doing a tour of the farm with your neighbor,  which is very important as well, maybe to start the journey.  
**[0:31:17-0:31:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:31:17):**  But we also have to understand that today there are many farmers who understand the  principles or even very conventional farmers who know that, but they don't know where they  are.  They don't know.  And year after year, they see this transition in three, four, five, seven years.  
**[0:31:41-0:31:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:31:41):**  And it's very important that the farmer can year after year understand that he made a  few percentage of effort there.  And there is a few kilos of nitrogen more and of CO2 more sequestered and a few euros  saved on the other part.  And I think that we need to see, we believe that we need to see to be much more granular  
**[0:32:08-0:32:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:32:08):**  in the future to accompany these farmers into this transition.  Yeah.  And you said something very interesting there.  I mean, a lot of very interesting points, but the peer part, because it's so far, I  mean, people can come to, can visit a farm, do a farm tour, visit Benedict or somebody  
**[0:32:25-0:32:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:32:25):**  else that has been doing pieces of the regenerative transition is increasing cover crops, et cetera.  But if you can see that your neighbor or somebody down the road who has very similar weather,  obviously, unless you have an enormous farm, maybe in Australia, but it's doing much better  financially with just between brackets, because it's obviously not just, but just a different  management and actually being financially much more profitable.  
**[0:32:50-0:32:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:32:50):**  Normally, maybe you would have seen it because somebody bought a new car, et cetera.  But if you can actually benchmark yourself with somebody down the road, that is in the  same system as you are the same context, how powerful is that?  Can you explain a bit that peer part of this journey?  Yeah.  
**[0:33:05-0:33:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:33:05):**  Again, it starts from the farm and the fact that the farmers are for me too isolated  because of many reasons, the workload, the fact that they are independent and the land  also competition with the neighbors.  So most of the farmers will not easily discuss about figures like economic.  No, they discuss about yield.  
**[0:33:37-0:33:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:33:37):**  Everybody's always like, I did that, but nobody ever discusses the cost part to that.  Yeah, and I think it's difficult to share that kind of information with your neighbor.  Mostly if you're trying to hope that you can buy the land of the neighbor in the future,  because there is so much competition on the land, that's another discussion,  but I think it's coming also from the system and the way we are farming.  
**[0:34:04-0:34:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:34:04):**  So how do you overcome that, that fear of sharing my profitability or my numbers?  Just by in this tool, just by aggregating the results of the neighbor, the data are protected.  So you can see the results of your farm because that's part of the exercise.  And together with the results of your farm, you're going to see the average of the farmers  of your region.  
**[0:34:32-0:34:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:34:32):**  And you can define the perimeter if you want to have a close radius or bigger radius.  And also we've extracted the best 25% in terms of cost of production.  So you're going to see that as well.  But you don't know which one it is.  You cannot, obviously on privacy reasons, it's a bit like the, I think they did it for  
**[0:34:52-0:34:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:34:52):**  energy use in households.  I don't remember where in the US, like you've been using on average, like you got a smiley,  you've been using less than your average household in your neighborhood, or you've been using  a lot more.  And they actually saw that people adjusted to that peer pressure of the peers they didn't  
**[0:35:08-0:35:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:35:08):**  know, or they couldn't identify.  But it's, that's very interesting.  Yeah.  Basically it's not adding much to understand who are the people behind the best farmers  of a bike.  
**[0:35:19-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:35:19):**  It can be interesting for your curiosity, but I think that the moment you understand  that you are better or worst than the best.  And if you, if you through the analysis of the information, you can understand why you  are better or worst.  That's for us already interesting and powerful enough to make people thinking and to make  
**[0:35:47-0:35:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:35:47):**  agronomists and farm manager changing the way they are operating.  No, it's extremely powerful.  And what are the next steps for this?  I mean, you said simplified, I think a number of times that you can make it more complex,  but you're mostly, I mean, the article, I think, I think is mostly the first pilot is  
**[0:36:06-0:36:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:36:06):**  mostly on Belgium.  And what are your plans with this, my soil capital, with this dashboard, with this service?  Is it open to all farmers?  Should people call if they're in Spain, if they're East of Berlin, like Gannadix, what's  the current status and the plan?  
**[0:36:20-0:36:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:36:20):**  So the plan on the very short term is to continue the development of the tool in a close radius  around us, because we have access to farmers and we can co-develop with farmers that we  know, fine tune the tool.  France, Belgium, on the medium term, a few months will translate the tool in English  so that we can extend the perimeter because we have a few farmers and farmers association  
**[0:36:52-0:37:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:36:52):**  in UK, for example, we're interested to start discussing about these dashboards.  That's on the perimeter.  We are also discussing with a few companies related to agriculture or not, who wants to  see carbon and carbon sequestration as something interesting.  So in parallel, we are trying to build a discussion with these people to see if at some point  
**[0:37:29-0:37:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:37:29):**  in the future, they could come with extra financing for farmers to reward the farmers  who did a good job or wants to go faster.  And what we also are aiming to do in the short term is to come with additional indicators  to complete the carbon picture with indicators like just to make, to be for the agronomist  or the farmer who analyze his information to understand where he should, why he's better,  
**[0:38:15-0:38:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:38:15):**  why he's not as good as the best producers.  So the rotation, diversity, the usage of certain agrochemicals, the land coverage, the soil  disturbance, we have already the fuel consumption and the number of hours spent in the tractors.  So we are working on those information also to make the discussion between the agronomist  and the farmer or us and the farmer richer and more clear in terms of what should you  
**[0:39:02-0:39:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:39:02):**  change in your operation if you want to reach the best performer.  Just having a question, wanting to hear your view on this, maybe also on a long term, because  the whole discussion on carbon sequestration and earning basically additional income for  farmers if they do store more carbon in the soil, it has such an incredible hype, obviously  Terratron and Indigo, they are pushing it on that sort of international level.  
**[0:39:28-0:39:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:39:28):**  But I mean, there's like, I wouldn't know about 10 to 15 different groups that are trying  to build a business around this idea.  And I've spoken to quite a few of those.  And often it's young people who are incredibly well gifted, and they come from an interdisciplinary  approach.  
**[0:39:42-0:39:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:39:42):**  And I mean, what I always tell them or what I try to show them is that just focusing on  carbon, we tend, I believe, I mean, I don't know, but I believe we tend to do the same  kind of mistake that we usually try to do it because we are talking about a complex  ecosystem.  Right.  
**[0:39:58-0:40:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:39:58):**  And carbon is one of many.  And if we think about monetizing something else, what I think we should do, what farmers  are bringing to the ecosystem, but also to us as people in general, don't we have to  look at it much, much broadly and think about all those different ecosystem functions where  aesthetics, for example, is a part of as well as a social component.  
**[0:40:22-0:40:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:40:22):**  And obviously, the whole carbon thing is much easier to, what do you call it, like to capture,  I guess, and then monetize it.  But don't we have to look at a much bigger picture and don't we have to do today in order  to develop the solution sooner than later?  Most of you on that.  
**[0:40:45-0:40:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:40:45):**  Yeah, I'm probably not the best person to answer that in the team because we have one  person who is working on that more than me.  But what I can see fully agree with you, carbon is a very restrictive way of measuring the  performance of a farm.  And any farmer could, any tricky farmer could think very quickly how to store carbon without  
**[0:41:13-0:41:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:41:13):**  being regenerative at all and how to do it fast.  So I agree with you that this is something that is not enough to measure or to classify  farms.  But I think that, remember that the price of the carbon today is very low.  So it will not be with the price of carbon of CO2 of 15, 20, 25, even 30 euro per ton  
**[0:41:39-0:41:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:41:39):**  sequestered.  And when you understand that a regenerative farm probably will sequester between two and  three, four tons per hectare per year, it makes less than or around 100 euro per hectare  of difference, which is for me totally, absolutely not enough to make people change.  It can help, but it's not enough.  
**[0:42:10-0:42:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:42:10):**  So I believe that together with this carbon thing, we will in the future discuss with  sophisticated companies, impact investors or people in the farming ecosystems where  that will understand that the carbon is a good metric.  But together with the carbon, there are many other benefits that could be attached, like  the biodiversity, like the soil erosion, like the water quality, a little bit like a  
**[0:42:45-0:42:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:42:45):**  Jaron Clump.  And they're trying to measure these natural benefits and quantify and make it more also  valuable.  So I believe that in our developed country, we will have opportunity and farmers will  have opportunity to be paid more for additional services.  
**[0:43:07-0:43:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:43:07):**  And I'm not obsessed by receiving more from external companies, as I was saying at the  beginning, but I think that it will make things more clear for people outside of farming that  carbon is not everything.  And I think that this will help this carbon discussion to be a little bit more richer,  the certification to be also a little bit more sophisticated in the future and more  
**[0:43:44-0:43:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:43:44):**  rewarding for farmers who want to change, who are making efforts for those who need  that extra money.  But I understand, but I still think that the carbon sequestration measure is probably not  the less worst entry point.  Yeah, and just we're going to interview Jaron Clump, founder of Sohero soon on the podcast.  
**[0:44:12-0:44:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:44:12):**  So you should be, if you're listening to this, I don't know when there could be an interview  already online so you can check it out.  Thanks for sharing your thoughts.  And I think, yeah, I mean, I agree.  Although I do think that when you refer to third party capital, let's say, I think there  
**[0:44:28-0:44:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:44:28):**  is quite a lot to come and not necessarily in a transition finance way, but like just  realizing what we are in our little bubble here in and around Berlin and the companies  that we are in contact with and even people who we are in contact with, there's such an  incredible value and there's such an incredible also sense of value and understanding of the  kind of things that we try to do here on the farm and why we're trying to do it.  
**[0:44:58-0:45:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:44:58):**  So companies, large companies.  We just got a message.  You remember, even from a person yesterday through the website, I want to do a shout  out to Jens.  Thank you very much for that message.  
**[0:45:09-0:45:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:45:09):**  I sent it to Benedict.  Somebody reached out that wants to donate some money to plant a number of hedgerows  because he's a beekeeper, sees the biodiversity going down and wants to donate some money  to Benedict.  And we're going to figure out how to increase biodiversity.  
**[0:45:24-0:45:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:45:24):**  Very small example, but it does show there is something happening on that front, both  small and big.  Yeah.  And I think, you know, letting people take part in the experiences that we have being  outside, planting the trees themselves, that brings an immediate connection to the space.  
**[0:45:41-0:45:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:45:41):**  It even has some spiritual element of well-being for those kind of people.  And it's even for companies.  So I think there is actually great potential for farmers to also think in that direction.  So yeah, I just wanted to give a statement there in this way because I think we can be  really positive about farming and we can be really positive about the way that we're  
**[0:46:05-0:46:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:46:05):**  trying to develop into because we're doing good stuff.  I mean, biodiversity is growing, the countryside is thriving, the nature is thriving.  It just makes sense.  And people realize that and people value that.  So I am actually really positive about that.  
**[0:46:23-0:46:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:46:23):**  Yeah.  And maybe I've been too extreme, but the time is limited.  So it's difficult to discuss about all the exceptions or small case.  And at Soil Capital, we're working with large scale farmers most of the time.  So the connection with the people, the connection with the consumers are completely lost.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:46:49):**  So people who are heavily subsidized, seeing the money coming back from the community  through subsidies and so on.  So clearly there are different kinds of agriculture.  And just to give the example of our small operations in Belgium, my partner and I are  farming on a small area.  
**[0:47:13-0:47:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:47:13):**  He has a butchery and there is a strong connection with the local community.  And I clearly value also the fact that at a very local scale, like the one we have in  Belgium, you can create a very interesting impact.  And the people, the consumers can really help the farmer to develop or to transition.  And they are much more rewarding and less, I would say, skeptical and difficult than  
**[0:47:56-0:48:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:47:56):**  what you could think while reading the newspaper or Facebook and so on.  They will understand that sometime in a conventional farm, you're going to use some glycoside,  for example, or they will understand that you cannot be working 100% on feed coming  from the farm because you're not producing all the protein yet.  And they will understand clearly that your vision and the direction you want to take  
**[0:48:23-0:48:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:48:23):**  and that you cannot go there in one day.  So all of this, I think it's definitely those are meaningful example and necessary experience  and pilot to be ahead of the curve and to influence the other.  But for the large scale farming that we are where we are involved, mostly at Soil Capital  or bigger farmer, I'm not talking about only people who got 1000 hectares or 2000 hectares,  
**[0:48:54-0:49:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:48:54):**  but a farm of 150 hectares or 100 hectares in Belgium or in France today, it's a big  operation with selling 90% or 99% on the commodity market, producing weeds, export to export  and meat to export and milk to export.  And so this is another discussion and we haven't discussed about markets.  And that I think is one of the purpose of the discussion.  
**[0:49:21-0:49:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:49:21):**  But clearly there is another part of our efforts at Soil Capital to work on the market and  how to decommoditize in the future all those production and work with clients to do that.  But that's another step, another additional revenue, another financing way to do that.  A way to accelerate the transition that we can definitely explore in another discussion.  But today, I think that what I wanted to highlight is really the fact that with the current market,  
**[0:49:56-0:50:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:49:56):**  with the current system, how can we improve at Farmgate without talking about the additional  revenue that can be generated by such an initiative?  Yeah, and I want to thank you for that.  Being conscious of your time, we definitely will come back on the market piece and another time.  I think we always end up at about an hour and feeling, I at least feel that we scratched  
**[0:50:21-0:50:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:50:21):**  the surface, pun definitely intended.  And talking about scratching the surface, Benedict has to go because he has to pick  up 600 chickens.  We're going to scratch a lot of chickens.  So it's a very exciting day.  
**[0:50:31-0:50:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:50:31):**  It's a very exciting day.  Baby chickens.  Yeah.  So I want to thank you so much, you guys, for sharing.  You've been on the podcast in a very short forum.  
**[0:50:39-0:50:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:50:39):**  Luckily, we had more time this time to go deeper.  Still not enough, obviously, because there's so much knowledge and so much you've seen  and you've done in this space.  I thank you for coming on, sharing your knowledge, your experience, your opportunities, your  doubts, et cetera, and we'll be in touch.  
**[0:50:54-0:50:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:50:54):**  Thank you, Koen.  And thank you, Benedict.  And really, congratulations for the work you're doing.  Because as I was saying during the podcast, we see the value of that while having clients  or farmers calling us to say, we've been in touch.  
**[0:51:05-0:51:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:51:05):**  We've been in touch or touched by messages, by information or bringing us to think about  changing our system.  So you're doing a great job.  Thank you so much for that.  Bye.  
**[0:51:18-0:51:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:51:18):**  Thank you for listening to this episode, which is part of the Transition Finance series,  trying to find appropriate transition finance to speed up regenerative agriculture on farms.  For feedback, ideas, suggestions, please contact us through Twitter or via the contact page  on the website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  Please share this episode with a friend and give us a five-star rating, which really helps  
**[0:51:39-0:51:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:51:39):**  others to find the podcast.  All the episodes of the series can be found on the website and in your podcast app.  Thank you and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:52:05-0:52:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:52:05):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After a hundred interviews and more than a hundred hours of audio asking the question,  how to put money to work in regenerating soils, and I've been following the space since 2011  and recording these podcasts since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:52:24-0:52:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:52:24):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision-making framework, what to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees and what questions should you ask?  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  
**[0:52:37-0:52:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:52:37):**  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space, the soil builders, people working in  
**[0:52:49-0:52:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:52:49):**  this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers, vehicle builders, crowd investing,  platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food companies, permaculture, key line  designers, holistic management, consultants, et cetera, et cetera.  People that are building soil at scale and the investors who are putting their own money  to work through their family office or as private individuals or people who are putting  
**[0:53:10-0:53:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:53:10):**  other people's money to work through foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies,  et cetera.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  
**[0:53:21-0:53:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:53:21):**  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  
**[0:53:38-0:53:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:53:38):**  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides.  So you don't have to ride along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  
**[0:53:54-0:54:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:53:54):**  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  
**[0:54:15-0:54:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:54:15):**  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  
**[0:54:28-0:54:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/05/26/transition-finance-ep6/#t=0:54:28):**  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  