### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-31)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now on to the podcast.  In this interview you will learn about how two of the most experienced regenerative investors  who have been investing in regenerative food systems, farmers and companies for the last  
**[0:00:23-0:00:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:00:23):**  almost 20 years are approaching a regenerative transition like the one on Benedict's farm.  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  This is a special dedicated series on transition finance.  Why are we recording this series?  Many farmers are ready to speed up their regenerative transition.  
**[0:00:53-0:00:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:00:53):**  They've looked for learning, done the courses, read the key books, hosted the gurus on their  farms, explored farm-sized regenerative designs and most importantly started their pilots  and feedback loops.  This is where transition finance is key.  A local bank loan often isn't feasible because of the short duration, lack of flexibility  
**[0:01:11-0:01:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:01:11):**  and the farmers lack of collateral.  Furthermore, there is a limit of how much equity a farmer is able or willing to give  away.  That is why my co-host aspiring to be regenerative farmer Benedikt Boezel and I are embarking  on a journey to find out what are the key principles of transition finance for regenerative  
**[0:01:30-0:01:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:01:30):**  farmers.  We are interviewing leading practitioners in the regenerative agriculture and food finance  space.  They share their insights how they would finance the speed up of the regenerative transition  on Benedict's 1000 hectares which is almost 2500 acres farm in Germany close to Berlin.  
**[0:01:48-0:01:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:01:48):**  This is an open process.  We are sharing our lessons through the podcast episodes as we go along.  We don't have the answers yet, just a lot of questions.  So please share with us any examples of transition finance you've seen, other inspiration, people  to interview etc.  
**[0:02:03-0:02:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:02:03):**  Get in touch via the contact page on the website investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  That is investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  So welcome to another episode in the transition finance series and today we're here with  the founders of Cienaga Capital and the No Regrets initiative, Sally Calhoun and Esther  Park which we both had on the podcast before but never together.  
**[0:02:25-0:02:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:02:25):**  It's the first time I think we're with four people.  So I'm very happy to have Benedikt Boezel back, obviously my co-host and Sally and Esther.  Welcome to you all on this March afternoon in very crazy times in terms of the coronavirus.  I don't know when people are going to listen to us but we're definitely all in lockdown  and dealing with these issues so we might kind of spend a bit of time on that but I'm  
**[0:02:47-0:02:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:02:47):**  very interested to dive deeper into transition finance and have you all here in this afternoon  on the call.  Great, thank you.  Glad to be here.  Thank you.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:02:56):**  And just a brief intro of our two guests.  We have two guests on the call today, Benedikt, so I'm very happy with that and could you,  for everybody that didn't listen to our early interviews, I will definitely link them below  to briefly introduce yourselves, Sally and Esther, so we have a short understanding  before we dive into this interview and then everybody should listen to the other ones  
**[0:03:16-0:03:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:03:16):**  obviously.  Okay, so my name is Sally Calhoun and I spent about 25 years in technology and then almost  20 years ago ended up becoming a rancher in central California.  Since then, I have been doing a lot of work on the ground around regenerating healthy  ecosystems while producing food, fuel and fiber and then managed to get into impact  
**[0:03:35-0:03:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:03:35):**  investing and philanthropy around the same issues and that whole effort is called the  No Regrets Initiative.  And what about you Esther?  What brings you here today?  Yes, I'm Esther Park.  
**[0:03:46-0:03:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:03:46):**  I head at Cienega Capital, which is part of the No Regrets Initiative and it's our private  investing vehicle where we invest in regenerative agriculture enterprises, so that includes  farms and food businesses.  And obviously my colleague, Benedikt, is on the call as well.  Yes, let me say that I'm really, really excited, if not nervous, to have both of you on the  
**[0:04:10-0:04:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:04:10):**  call.  I see you have been visionaries in the field and at the very forefront of not only taking  a risk but also having no regrets afterwards.  I think that is really important and I love the title of it.  And Kun, you just said it, we have a really tough time, really challenging time with regards  
**[0:04:30-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:04:30):**  to the COVID or coronavirus and then having those kind of figures as you are, Esther and  Sally, that gives hope for all of us.  So very grateful to have you guys on the call and looking forward to hear what you can share  with us from your experience.  Yes, so to dive in with that straight away, I've had the pleasure to meet both of you  
**[0:04:51-0:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:04:51):**  actually in person and also visit the farm and see a bit how you operate.  But I would love to know how would you approach something in this case?  Obviously, you're not financing anything outside the US, so it's not a pitch.  We're not pitching Benedikt's farm.  But let's say a farmer like Benedikt knocks on your door and not in this case, virtually  
**[0:05:11-0:05:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:05:11):**  obviously, because we cannot contaminate anyone, but knocks on the door and says, I'm operating  this farm, I want to go faster, I want to transition and my local bank has no idea what  I'm doing.  And I know some VC investors, etc., but they probably also don't really know what I'm doing.  Plus, let's say the investment model is a bit tricky.  
**[0:05:30-0:05:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:05:30):**  What would be your first questions?  What would be your first understanding to approach more to understand more to see, to  get a bit deeper into the case to see if it's something you might could work on from your  initiative?  Well, I guess I would ask, what does going faster mean?  
**[0:05:45-0:05:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:05:45):**  And what does that look like?  And I would try to understand what kind of existing business and revenues are going on  at the farm and see, is there a clear line between what's going on today and what you  plan or hope to have going on in the future?  And so what is the acceleration of that line look like?  
**[0:06:09-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:06:09):**  What does that mean to you?  What kind of financing do you think you need for that?  And then we would just go into questions around the planning, the financial model, as well  as just understanding his local situation and the markets that surround it.  And I think that if it's a reasonable plan, what we would try to do is figure out what  
**[0:06:31-0:06:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:06:31):**  is the right financing that's appropriate for him.  And that's kind of how we approach most of the things that we do.  It's sort of starting with what is your context, what is your situation, and what is your plan,  and then trying to find the right kind of financing, the form of financing that'll fit  that situation.  
**[0:06:49-0:06:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:06:49):**  So depending on what it's for, it could mean that there's a debt investment alone of some  kind or if Benedict has some kind of operation where he might be aggregating product from  multiple farms and selling under a common brand, there could be some kind of an equity  play there.  So it just depends.  
**[0:07:10-0:07:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:07:10):**  It depends on the business model, what's going on, and what the financing is for.  And I think the first thing, one of the first things Esther would say is don't spend too  much time talking to the venture capitalists.  Right.  Yeah.  
**[0:07:22-0:07:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:07:22):**  Especially in this sector.  This is actually such an interesting part of the discussion.  And I often talk with people about it, not only investors, but people who are into farming  or people who are close to farming.  And because we always say, how can we scale regenerative technologies?  
**[0:07:40-0:07:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:07:40):**  How can we stay regenerative agriculture?  And I think one of the key, let's say difficulties is, and Sally, I would really like to know  how you see that, is that there is quite a few, that the uncertainty of it is still very  large, especially if it's not so strongly basically aggregating products from around  other farms and then having an easy to go with business model, let's say.  
**[0:08:07-0:08:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:08:07):**  But actually to say, I want to regenerate the land, I want to change the regime of treating  the land, it is supposedly going to soil health and I will need a time of five, six, seven,  maybe 10 years in which I will have to change the whole setting, basically the whole philosophy.  So there is this vision on one side where there's just so much uncertainty and on the  other side you have a financial model and a plan.  
**[0:08:34-0:08:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:08:34):**  And I mean, I can't do that.  I've been in investment banking before and I know how to tweak the numbers, so to say.  But having those two realities in a sense and where is the truth and how open or not  how open, but how can you somehow find the right mix, which you want to be responsible  about if you're taking on a third party, money of a third party.  
**[0:08:58-0:09:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:08:58):**  And like, how do you, Sally, from sort of the visionary point of view, how would you  go about that or what would be your approach?  So as I think you're right, there's this tremendous uncertainty.  None of us have any idea how this really turns out at scale or how we can make this happen.  But maybe it's just that the uncertainty here is more obvious than it is in a lot of places.  
**[0:09:20-0:09:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:09:20):**  Maybe we are less willing to hang our hats on some spreadsheet that's been finagled  than a lot of other people are.  If you look at venture capitalists, they assume that at least 50 percent of their companies  will just fail.  Forty percent will probably not do well.  
**[0:09:34-0:09:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:09:34):**  So they're taking this huge risk.  But unfortunately, in our society, then we want this giant return, possibility of return  in exchange.  But I mean, Esther and I often say that we think that the perception of return, financial  return is of market rate is higher than it actually is even in the market.  
**[0:09:53-0:09:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:09:53):**  So I think it's right now, I think you have to find investors who are willing to look  more broadly at return and take social return and ecological return along with financial  return.  I don't honestly have any idea how we get the whole world, the whole investment world  to feel that way.  
**[0:10:08-0:10:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:10:08):**  I sort of think that basically we are like starting a little snowball, the investors  who are willing to do this now.  And it's going to take probably not investment capital to scale this.  It's going to take the world realizing that this is as important as the trillion dollars  we're about to spend on the coronavirus in the United States.  
**[0:10:28-0:10:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:10:28):**  And that as a society, we're going to have to that's how we're going to scale societally,  this society can look at all those different returns.  So that's not a particularly great answer for someone looking for financial backing  at this point in time.  But that's kind of that's the best answer that I can come up with.  
**[0:10:44-0:10:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:10:44):**  I don't really know how investors scale this, given the uncertainty, the time required and  the relatively small financial return that's linked to ecological return at this point  in time.  Right.  I mean, this I feel you.  
**[0:10:58-0:11:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:10:58):**  This is exactly what I believe, to be honest with you, but my more sort of critic friends  or critic farmers or visitors who are more critical about this, they would say and there's  a lot of honesty and truth to that, that, you know, saying, well, social and ecological  capital, I mean, it's good and we all want it and we need it.  But in the end of the day, it has to be obviously economically viable.  
**[0:11:21-0:11:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:11:21):**  And we all believe that it is.  And I think there's farmers all over the world who are showing that it is economically viable  and quite well.  But Esther, like what would you say, you know, coming more from the sort of investment angle,  what is your approach about that?  
**[0:11:37-0:11:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:11:37):**  Do you think we can actually see a change basically in a potential financial product  that says, well, you know, in the time span of maybe 10 years, we will have three or four  years that we already basically discount in a way that we know that there might be a crisis  and there might not be a new tea being paid.  So how do you see the flexibility of financial products with regard to, you know, what we're  
**[0:12:01-0:12:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:12:01):**  trying to achieve?  Yeah, I think that you can build in flexibility into financial products.  We do it all the time.  I think what the real flexibility that needs to happen is in the mind and in the frameworks  that we think about things, you know, because we talk about, you mentioned scale, how do  
**[0:12:20-0:12:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:12:20):**  we scale this thing?  Well, you know, we have scaled traditional agriculture and look at how that turned out.  Right.  So I think one of the things that we talk about is scaling across as opposed to scaling  up.  
**[0:12:33-0:12:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:12:33):**  So how can we take models of people who are doing this well and doing it, you know, in  a financially viable way?  And how can we replicate that across regions and climates and soil types and all of those  kinds of things?  And there's one farmer in particular I remember talking to who said, actually, he wants to  
**[0:12:53-0:12:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:12:53):**  be able to try to do more on fewer acres.  So he actually wants to shrink his operation, but he thinks he can actually produce more  and create more revenue on fewer acres.  So that was a really interesting concept to me about thinking differently about how you  can scale an operation or, you know, what is this concept of scale?  
**[0:13:14-0:13:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:13:14):**  Why do we need it?  What we actually want and what we actually need is more people on the land doing these  types of practices and being in relationship with nature and our ecology and our food system,  rather than, you know, bigger operations with fewer people.  So I think we're trying to think about risk and scale and return a little bit differently  
**[0:13:37-0:13:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:13:37):**  in terms of, you know, and then just in terms of financial return, why is it that we can't  ever lose any money?  Right.  The assumption is you can't ever fail.  You can't ever lose money.  
**[0:13:48-0:13:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:13:48):**  And the fact is that never happens in life.  We can see that the public stock exchange, the last weeks, which all the models.  If you want to talk about market rate of return today, that market rate of return is negative  50, 60, 70.  I mean, that's what we're looking at right now.  
**[0:14:09-0:14:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:14:09):**  And I was telling Sally the other day that I remember having to respond to the 2008 crash.  And that was just 12 years ago.  Are we going to have to go through this every 10 years?  You know, is this the cycle that we're going to see ourselves in?  In which case, I would say the net on that is zero in terms of financial return.  
**[0:14:32-0:14:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:14:32):**  So what are we really talking about?  What are we really trying to go for and achieve with what we're trying to invest our money  in?  I think we need to think about that a bit differently.  It's interesting you said that people say, ah, ecological capital, social capital, that's  
**[0:14:47-0:14:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:14:47):**  great.  But it'll be interesting to see a few months from now whether people are so cavalier about  social capital, for example.  I think it really takes a crisis to whack us all in the head to see that there are things  besides the financial world that drive people and the planet.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:15:05):**  For example, being in a supermarket and not seeing any vegetables or any animal products  and suddenly realise and think, oh, I might have a farmer nearby that maybe actually I  remember they are selling something directly.  Maybe I can, having access in the pre-call, we were discussing that being grateful for  having access to food is something we completely forgot because it was always there.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:15:27):**  It always showed up magically, like poof, on the shelf.  And there was no even a question, maybe the broccoli was sold out once in whatever amount  of years and now everything, at least here in Europe, in many places, is just not there.  And it will get there and nobody's going to starve, but it's a very strong wake-up call,  not even to talk about the quality of the food.  
**[0:15:47-0:15:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:15:47):**  And I think there's even one additional part of that argument.  Like farmers, especially in Germany in the last couple of months, they have really had  a tough time because you had all sorts of groups of people going on the street and saying,  we don't agree with this and we don't agree with that and we want you to do more sustainable  and more biodiversity and things like that.  
**[0:16:09-0:16:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:16:09):**  And many try to do it as good as they can.  So I think also a sort of a self-appreciation of the farmers themselves now is picking up  because of it, because people are approaching them in a different way.  So this has a nice social element on the farmers' lives because suddenly they feel like, wow,  this is actually my business or my job basically is relevant for the system.  
**[0:16:34-0:16:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:16:34):**  So I think that appreciation that is now arising, that goes into both ways.  And just to follow up on that, no, go ahead, Esther.  Well, I was just going to say one of the things that I've heard Sally say is that in the middle  of the country here in the US, in the Midwest, most farmers don't grow food for people.  A lot of that is for animal feed or export or fuel, highly manufactured food-like products,  
**[0:17:02-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:17:02):**  ingredients, but not actual food.  And so it's interesting now in this time for people to have to think about, well, how can  I get closer to the source of my food to be able to even just get it?  So I can't go to the store and get eggs because they're all gone, but hens lay eggs every  day.  
**[0:17:25-0:17:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:17:25):**  So then it makes me think, where are their hens laying eggs and where can I go find them?  And so it suddenly starts me thinking now, where does that actually happen?  And how can I get closer to that source?  Yeah, I mean, I'm very curious how much of this is going to stick and how much of this  interest and hopefully, let's say through great taste and great experiences with local  
**[0:17:47-0:17:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:17:47):**  farmers or with your local farmers, because whatever local you can find, some of that  will stick and create a stronger connection.  To come back, you mentioned, I wrote down the word flexibility.  You can build that into something you said.  Do you have any experiences, because the flexibility in terms of in times of this enormous shocks,  
**[0:18:07-0:18:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:18:07):**  which we'll see more often than happen more often, seems to be very, very important in  finance, but seems to be very missing usually.  You said, yeah, but actually, you can easily, I don't think you said easily, you can build  that in.  Do you have any examples of where the flexibility has been built in into the investments you've  
**[0:18:23-0:18:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:18:23):**  made to basically put you as an investor on the same side as the entrepreneur farmer instead  of just on the other side of the table?  Sure.  I mean, we look very closely at cash flow.  Many times when we're doing a loan, particularly, I'm looking very closely at cash flow.  
**[0:18:43-0:18:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:18:43):**  I will build in certain structures that make sense for that cash flow.  Sometimes I'll say, hey, it looks like based on your projections, you won't be able to  make any payments to us for the first 12 or 18 months, because you're going through an  investment period, you're not going to be making any money, there's not going to be  any cash flow.  
**[0:19:03-0:19:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:19:03):**  We'll just give you a bit of a grace period.  Sometimes I'll pad it.  You say it's 12 months, I might say it's 15 or 18 months, just to give you a little bit  of extra leeway because always the unexpected happens.  In some cases, particularly with farmers, they're very seasonal.  
**[0:19:23-0:19:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:19:23):**  You can pay me twice a year in July and December or whatever it might be according to their  production schedule.  Or if it makes sense, there's one lump payment per year, depending on the nature of their  business and how they're doing.  We try to build as much of that flexibility in as possible from the outset.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:19:45):**  But a lot of our flexibility actually comes after we've made the loan or the investment,  where we said, okay, things have not turned out the way that we thought it would, but  let's reassess and let's renegotiate the terms of this loan.  We're in that relationship, we're in that communication with the entrepreneurs and trying  to make it work as best for them as possible.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:20:09):**  Do you see that as a as a motive of operating that everyone should do?  Or is it because we're so much in the pioneering phase that it does require a very specific  way on every case?  At some point, is it going to be more standardized?  If we want to use the word again, scale or replicate, there's over 100,000 of farmers,  
**[0:20:34-0:20:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:20:34):**  how would that work in the future?  Are they going to be standard flexible, which is a contradiction?  How do we do that with a lot of these individual cases, which are very different?  Maybe there are going to be a lot of Midwest farmers knocking on your door in the next  weeks because they want to switch from fuel to something to food.  
**[0:20:50-0:20:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:20:50):**  And they're going to all require a different approach.  Yeah, I would hope that we could figure out some kind of standard flexibility, if that's  not an oxymoron.  But yeah, I think what it really just takes is not trying to fit in a box all the time.  It actually takes a mindset of thinking outside the box.  
**[0:21:14-0:21:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:21:14):**  And I think we need more people who can think that way.  So I'm actually part of, I think going on its third year initiative called the Integrated  Capital Institute that was started by RSF to basically cultivate more people who can  think differently about financing and financing structures.  So hopefully we'll brainwash enough investors to start thinking in this way.  
**[0:21:41-0:21:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:21:41):**  Inspire, inspire.  Okay, inspire.  I mean, I think one of the issues, if you look at the Midwest is so there is all this  variability, particularly in farming.  And what we did at starting in the Great Depression, right, was we put federal programs in place  
**[0:21:56-0:21:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:21:56):**  to even all of that out.  So we put in crop insurance and we put in crop subsidies and they are flexible, right?  Your crop insurance kicks in if your crop is destroyed by hail.  But what it allowed is it allowed the finance system to become completely inflexible because  they had this sort of base guaranteed return in agriculture.  
**[0:22:15-0:22:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:22:15):**  And so societally, we took all of that risk and we still do through crop insurance.  So it's not like the risk is not there for those bankers who are inflexible.  They've just, we've come up as a way to minimize their risk and to make things look  not risky, which really are.  And so I guess the question is just who's going to take the risk going forward?  
**[0:22:36-0:22:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:22:36):**  Yeah, we removed it.  Right.  Yeah.  Yeah, that's a great point, actually.  And I think it's so important to have those kind of examples because the kind of language  
**[0:22:46-0:22:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:22:46):**  that you use in the story that you tell is such a huge part of developing or basically  inspiring people to go or follow you or are open to being part of that process.  So I think that was great.  One thing I also wanted to just have an opinion of you guys is a problem that I'm being seeing  here in Germany at least is that we have a huge lack of independency.  
**[0:23:16-0:23:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:23:16):**  So there's all the farmers are already stuck in the system.  They have made huge investments.  They have done a big stable.  They have done this.  They have done that.  
**[0:23:27-0:23:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:23:27):**  They are very specialized.  So getting out of the system is one thing.  It depends on where you are, if you can do it or can't, or if it will take a bit longer  or a bit less.  But also going out there through additional investments, through additional debt is always  
**[0:23:45-0:23:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:23:45):**  difficult in a way because they already have a lot of debt.  They don't have a good cash flow.  They are already in huge investment processes or spheres.  So I think finding and building independency for farmers, I think is for me one of the  key tasks or key things that we have to make sure of.  
**[0:24:08-0:24:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:24:08):**  And the question is, how do we get there if the cash flow is low, if debt is high, and  you don't want to make them any more investments?  So any thoughts on that situation?  Well, it's a question that we think about quite a bit because we need more farmers to  transition to regenerative practices.  
**[0:24:27-0:24:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:24:27):**  And we frankly find, to your experience, Benedict, that farmers are stuck.  They're very stuck in the current system that they're in.  They're stuck with the types of subsidies and crop insurance and existing debt that  they have around this.  We haven't yet sort of thought about how to address existing debt.  
**[0:24:48-0:24:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:24:48):**  But one of the things that I have found in talking to farmers who are doing regenerative  practices, if they haven't been doing it from the beginning, it took a major crisis for  them to change their practices.  They essentially went bankrupt, right?  In which case, when you go bankrupt, you discharge your obligations.  
**[0:25:08-0:25:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:25:08):**  And in a way, you're able to wipe the slate clean and start over.  But many of those folks faced that situation.  And that allowed them and gave them the freedom to change.  It also sort of forced their hand to think about things differently.  So we've been thinking about and experimenting with just conversations with partners in different  
**[0:25:27-0:25:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:25:27):**  regions around how can we help farmers so stuck in the traditional paradigm start to  move.  And one of the things that we've been doing on the philanthropic side of our work is funding  some work around a new crop insurance product.  So could there be crop insurance for folks who are doing things differently, who are  
**[0:25:49-0:25:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:25:49):**  implementing what we call conservation practices, who are cover cropping and building diversity  into their rotations and reducing tillage and things like that.  So what if we could build something in the existing subsidy market that would reward  practices that are more regenerative to help people make that transition?  So there are things like that that we're talking to some folks about and trying to put a little  
**[0:26:12-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:26:12):**  bit of money towards as well.  I think the elephant in the room is always the general financial situation of farmers.  There's an economist named Ken Meador who works in the United States.  And I first saw him a few years ago.  And he basically said that the return on investment for farming in the United States is negative.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:26:28):**  Look at any state, look at any county, look at the entire country.  It's all negative.  So I sometimes get snarky when people say, but how will you make money practicing regenerative  agriculture?  It's like, I don't know, the same way everybody else does.  
**[0:26:42-0:26:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:26:42):**  I always joke, but it's not a joke.  Like find me a profitable, for sure I'm getting emails now, but find me a profitable farmer  without, in this case in Europe, the subsidy system or some kind of outside payment coming  in or a partner working off farm and looking at the number of hours that go into it.  We have this illusion, I think you're absolutely right, that the extractive guys and girls  
**[0:27:06-0:27:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:27:06):**  are making so much money and we have to compete with that.  No, it's actually an illusion of return that is not there, but unfortunately it's the story  that we keep telling ourselves that the extractive version is generating so much returns.  Yes, for the input companies, but not necessarily for the farmers or probably necessarily not  for the farmers.  
**[0:27:24-0:27:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:27:24):**  I think the other part of that illusion that's helping investors not be able to see this  is the price of land.  So you're a REIT, a real estate investment trust.  You invest in agricultural land and you make a ton of money.  That's just because the underlying value of the land, mostly around speculation went up.  
**[0:27:38-0:27:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:27:38):**  It's not because you made a ton of money farming.  It's completely disconnected from the production value or the potential production of the land.  Yeah, I mean, Sally, because you mentioned it, that whole discussion on how do we actually  treat the land and who are we actually, supposedly, meant to own land, does that actually work?  Is land not a public good and we're like the shepherds of it?  
**[0:28:04-0:28:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:28:04):**  That whole financing part, how can we get young people or how can we get any people  really who want to own the land, work the land, get in touch with it, build that relationship,  that trust, grow food?  This is such a big part of that whole discussion because land prices today are so high, you  cannot buy it if you're a farmer.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:28:23):**  There is just no way.  So how can we solve that?  That's really tough and it's such a fundamental question.  Yeah, I'm speechless on that one.  Don't say that.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:28:35):**  Come on.  I mean, I think there are some local solutions to that.  For example, I think that in California, there's a tremendous amount of public land and there's  a tremendous amount of conservation land, at least all over the United States.  That has been conserved and turned no longer working landscapes in a lot of cases.  
**[0:28:57-0:29:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:28:57):**  One first step, hopefully, that we're working on in California with a number of partners  is to turn that public land back into working landscapes to change this notion of conserving,  which means closing the gate and kicking the people off and thinking more about that land,  which is publicly owned for the public good, for the public benefit, differently.  Now that's a pretty specific solution depending on where you are, but I think that does have  
**[0:29:20-0:29:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:29:20):**  potential in some places to change the thinking around that.  Yeah, and I think there's a lot of work being done on the ownership discussion on trusts,  on when retirement comes and how to then take the land off the market instead of selling  it for speculation and making sure it's then governed in a different way and basically  never to be sold again, but still obviously farmed very regeneratively, which is a very  
**[0:29:46-0:29:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:29:46):**  difficult and long process, but very interesting as more of that land comes as long as it's  governed and managed well, obviously.  But it's a very tricky one and some people call it the huge bubble as most of the land  is used for fuel and for feed, not for food.  If that collapses at some point, what will happen with all that land?  
**[0:30:06-0:30:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:30:06):**  So there's also the notion and the illusion of, I see many people keep buying land and  sort of imagine it will always go up.  I mean, nothing will always go up.  So there's gotta be a shock on that.  I don't know where it comes from.  
**[0:30:17-0:30:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:30:17):**  Could be fake meat, could be wherever, but the notion that the land prices will always  go up is also, I think, a very tricky way to build your fund thesis or something like  that.  Clearly the problem is not that there's money.  What did Impossible Foods raise $500 million last week?  
**[0:30:34-0:30:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:30:34):**  Wow, I missed that.  What's the probability?  There's enough money here.  That being said, Esther, I have a question with that in that regard as well, because  have you had any contact or is there any movement with regards to reinsurance companies in the  
**[0:30:51-0:30:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:30:51):**  US?  Because those companies have all the risk, right?  If there's anyone really thinking progressively about health, public health, about soil, about  climate, I mean, it's the reassurance companies, right?  And they have money, right?  
**[0:31:06-0:31:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:31:06):**  They have capital.  So I was wondering, is there not an argument to basically start a discussion with them  as well and say, look, guys, if you want to be somehow on top of the risk that is going  to come, let's talk about land use.  So any thoughts on that?  
**[0:31:21-0:31:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:31:21):**  Any movement there in the US?  I have not seen any movement on that particular front.  I think where we're starting to see some movement is on the human health side.  So the health insurance carriers are starting to see that preventive care is a huge cost  savings.  
**[0:31:39-0:31:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:31:39):**  And so to the extent that they can help people eat healthier, to the extent that they can  give them access to more nutrient dense foods, it seems worthwhile to them.  So there are some health insurance companies here in the US that are starting to think  about the connection to food and how it's produced.  We also have been in touch with some people in the medical field, and particularly people  
**[0:32:04-0:32:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:32:04):**  in the medical field who work with farm workers.  They're very concerned about their health and about the environmental conditions that  they find themselves in.  Oftentimes they're very toxic, depending on the kinds of chemicals that are being used  on those farms.  
**[0:32:18-0:32:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:32:18):**  And so I think from the medical health perspective, we are starting to see some movement.  And that's where it's happening.  I'm not really seeing it happen in the mainstream insurance industry yet.  Very interesting.  And I actually want to ask a question to Benedict because Esther brought up a nice one.  
**[0:32:35-0:32:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:32:35):**  So what does going faster and scale mean to you?  And we've had those discussions in our first interview, which I will also link below, with  your vision, obviously, for the farm and for the estate as a platform.  But why do we keep discussing scale on the interviews we're doing here and going faster  with your regenerative transition?  
**[0:32:54-0:32:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:32:54):**  Well, that is indeed a good question.  I have to give you that.  And there's a couple of answers to that, to be totally honest with you, depending from  which angle I want to approach it.  As of now, if you ask me in this particular time right now, it's basically just getting  
**[0:33:14-0:33:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:33:14):**  up the numbers of the cows that we have.  We started with a little group of cows last year to get some first experience, to do the  mistakes that you do, to get some understanding of the movements and the processes and the  things that you need and the risks and whatever.  We've done that now.  
**[0:33:31-0:33:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:33:31):**  I have a bit of a, or we have a bit of a better understanding of what we're trying to do at  the moment.  But really to get that additional value add, the ecosystem function, get up the soil health,  have the cow be out there and actually help us also bringing down the cost by basically  doing the job that we today would be doing by buying manure and then bringing it out  
**[0:33:57-0:33:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:33:57):**  mechanically.  I would need a lot of more cows.  So I could basically just buy, let's say 150, 200 cows, depending on how I want to go.  And that would be a big step.  And with that comes some investment into infrastructure and building fences and all that.  
**[0:34:14-0:34:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:34:14):**  I think that would be something that would be the most immediate benefit and the most  big step, let's say.  And then I think apart from that, there's a couple of other things that you can do as  well.  Because today, as we are very grain dominated, we have a very tight, let's say grain production.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:34:31):**  So basically deciding to take out some of the acreage to actually have, let's say a  cover crop, a perennial cover crop for the cows to get on there, but then incorporate  that into basically the regime to if I go with, let's say, spelt, which is something  that we actually can earn a lot of money with, then I'm harvesting five tons per hectare  and not three tons, because I have actually managed to increase the soil to actually put  
**[0:34:58-0:35:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:34:58):**  in the nitrogen through the cows together with the cover crops.  These are steps and certain risks that I cannot take at the moment, because we had two large  droughts last year.  If something is happening with this again, it's kind of life threatening.  We have a lot of employees and responsible for those families as well as for my own family.  
**[0:35:17-0:35:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:35:17):**  So these are basically simple first steps in a way and simple, obviously, let's see,  it's complicated as it is.  And then additionally to that, there's a couple of other things that we can do basically,  right?  And start agroforestry systems or rows on huge fields.  
**[0:35:35-0:35:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:35:35):**  We have fields that are 80 hectares.  Thinking about erosion, soil erosion through rain, through wind.  So things that we can do there.  Obviously, the whole machine park that you could adapt to what's more regenerative methods.  I mean, there's still certain areas that we are plowing.  
**[0:35:51-0:35:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:35:51):**  I would love obviously to sell the plow, right?  But first of all, I have to make sure that the people are working with us.  They understand why and they want to go this way as well.  So it takes some time to convince them of that, maybe a new way that they haven't been  used to.  
**[0:36:08-0:36:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:36:08):**  That's really, really critical.  And at the same time, if we ditch the plow and say, well, we'll do everything different  now, we will have a couple of years and depending on the weather, obviously, where we will have  a large dip in the income.  So these are things that you could speed up obviously as well.  
**[0:36:28-0:36:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:36:28):**  So I think it's a couple of different things actually.  It's really a few.  Is that something you hear?  I mean, obviously it's a very different climate, a very different country where Benedict is  operating, but is that something similar you've heard before or a similar approach that is  
**[0:36:47-0:36:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:36:47):**  common also in the US?  Absolutely.  I mean, I think one of the things that we've learned at the Piscinus Ranch is that we can  only go as fast as nature is willing to go with us.  So I think there's a lot of things that we'd love to see happen faster on the land and  
**[0:37:06-0:37:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:37:06):**  in the soil, but we're doing everything that we can and we just have to cooperate with  nature and she's going to tell us how fast this can happen, how fast the regeneration  can happen.  But definitely in terms of investment of things like livestock and weathering some of the  tougher environmental things, I mean, here in the middle of our country, the farmers  
**[0:37:34-0:37:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:37:34):**  suffered pretty drastically the last couple of years because of too much rain.  So they weren't able to get the crops in when they needed to, they weren't able to harvest  it when they needed to.  There was just a lot of delays that they suffered and a lot of losses that they suffered because  of extreme weather events related to our climate.  
**[0:37:54-0:38:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:37:54):**  So those are all things that we're very familiar with hearing.  And I think that, again, kind of like in this time, I'm hoping that my theory around resilient  food systems is going to prove out around local and regional, but I also believe that  in the long term that your farm and your agricultural system will be more resilient to these events  as you continue to nurture and improve the soil.  
**[0:38:24-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:38:24):**  So that's a theory.  And I think that we're willing to go with people through a certain extent, the tough  times to be able to sort of come out on the other side with more resilience on the land.  And did you see an increase because of these tough times for many farmers in the US, an  increase of people reaching out to you that were getting closer to the crisis moment that  
**[0:38:46-0:38:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:38:46):**  you described before?  Is there an uptake?  Is there more energy around, let's say, soil and region, or are we still too early to tell?  Well, we haven't seen it because the traditional farmers that are feeling like they need something  different don't know about us.  
**[0:39:06-0:39:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:39:06):**  So we haven't been hearing from them, but we have been hearing from the people around  them that do know us.  So people who work either in government or technical assistance or other kinds of organizations  that surround the farms, they're telling us these people need help.  They need to learn more about this.  
**[0:39:26-0:39:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:39:26):**  They need access to experts and to financing.  And so that we've been hearing.  And I think that it's probably too early today to say, here's what we're doing to actively  address that.  But we are in multiple conversations with folks around what is needed to help support  
**[0:39:44-0:39:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:39:44):**  the transition for these farmers.  Because a lot of them, I mean, we're seeing here in this country unprecedented rates of  suicide among farmers.  Just financially, they can't figure out how to make it anymore.  And I think that with, again, the weather events, it's just increased fragility of these  
**[0:40:03-0:40:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:40:03):**  farming operations.  I mean, I think we heard about it in Iowa, for example, when there's all this presidential  campaigning four years ago, that climate change was not an issue.  Farmers don't want to talk about climate change.  Apparently this year I was in Iowa.  
**[0:40:18-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:40:18):**  But what you hear is that there's pretty much consensus that the climate is changing.  We might still argue about why.  But there seems to be we're now at the point where at least we're maybe getting a consensus  among farmers in the middle of the country that they have to do something differently.  Well, sometimes I have the feeling that there is so much potential that lies within changing  
**[0:40:41-0:40:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:40:41):**  a routine that lies within innovating on the farm, innovating with the farmers and helping  them also in the transition phase and bringing in young people.  Because all those different problems can be combined into a solution.  For example, I have this really talented young guy from Belgium, and he is deeply into composting  methodologies and all different composting from vermiculture through Johnson Sue and  
**[0:41:09-0:41:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:41:09):**  everything you basically know.  And he would like, and this is something we cannot do, we don't have that know-how here,  he would like to stay here on the farm, basically be an entrepreneur on his own, but on our  farm.  And we obviously would love to facilitate that.  
**[0:41:24-0:41:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:41:24):**  But he would need roughly 30,000 euros per year for maybe two or three years in order  to test those composting forms, to do a compost tea, to apply it on different plots, to basically  do all the research that you have to do on the ground here with the biomass that we have  to afterwards say, look, this is the way that is specifically good for your farm.  This is something you can transition into.  
**[0:41:49-0:41:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:41:49):**  And these are the investment costs and this is what you need.  And then you can basically start.  What do you have?  Basically the proof that has been basically derived on your farm.  And I think this is a model, basically having young people who are also entrepreneurs at  
**[0:42:03-0:42:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:42:03):**  the same time on your farm that basically help you transition into that kind of way  without having too much financial risk on it.  And it's not that much money if you think about it like that, especially if you find  an elegant way that the farmer doesn't have to pay for it him or herself.  So I think there's huge potential to just motivate and inspire and bring in young people  
**[0:42:29-0:42:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:42:29):**  who then help farmers transition.  And I think that's could be one of the many solutions that we have.  Absolutely.  And we have done some grant making on the philanthropic side for some of those kinds  of projects.  
**[0:42:43-0:42:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:42:43):**  I think it fits great with the farm as a platform, which we discussed previously in other interviews,  like how to open it up and really use it, the biomass as a platform and the space as  a platform and obviously the connections and resources and really switching that mindset  from this is a farm with a big gate around it.  That's it.  
**[0:43:04-0:43:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:43:04):**  But it's actually an ecosystem.  So just to be conscious of everybody's time, I want to thank you.  First of all, I always end with a final question, which never is a final question, but some  final advice for Benedict and myself, but mostly for Benedict is this journey on transition  finance.  
**[0:43:20-0:43:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:43:20):**  Is there any language we should use?  Is there any way we can communicate better and more effectively with people that could  potentially fund?  And I use fund in not just investor, but also on the grant side, a lot of the things that  need to happen and we would like to see happening on the farm and definitely using the farm  
**[0:43:39-0:43:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:43:39):**  as a platform over the next years.  Any words of wisdom from definitely the fields you have been operating in for quite a while?  Well, I guess I would just say, you know, I would just encourage you to keep going.  I mean, in terms of financing, obviously, I think the world has not quite caught up  to you yet.  
**[0:43:58-0:44:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:43:58):**  But, you know, Sally and I are doing a lot of work to try to set a good example.  We are trying to inspire other investors and philanthropists to do more of this work and  to do it with the frame of thinking that we're using.  So we're hoping to try to build the field around you.  So to the extent that you can be patient and come alongside, I think that, you know, eventually  
**[0:44:21-0:44:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:44:21):**  we're going to need you and we do need you.  So don't give up.  Yeah, that's pretty much what I was going to say.  And I think the encouraging part is that just in the last couple of years, people are realizing  that things have to change.  
**[0:44:35-0:44:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:44:35):**  I really do feel like that in the world, there's a realization that we have to manage this  land differently.  I think we're still stuck at the yes, we want it to be different, but we don't want to pay  for it point.  But I do think the explosion of interest, the explosion of understanding is going to  
**[0:44:50-0:44:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:44:50):**  make a difference.  I just have no idea when.  But I think if we've learned nothing in the last week, it's that things that looked impossible  are actually possible.  And that if the world wants to do something, we can mobilize an incredible amount of humanity  
**[0:45:04-0:45:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:45:04):**  and financial resources.  I mean, who would have thought the Republicans would be talking about a trillion dollar aid  package in the United States?  So I think we can't assume that because we're here today, we can't get here.  I think we just can't see how it happens now.  
**[0:45:19-0:45:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:45:19):**  There's no rational logical path, but it's probably going to happen somehow faster maybe  than we ever imagined.  So yeah, hang in there.  Yeah, I mean, this was one of the most beautiful sentences I've heard in a long time and I  totally agree.  
**[0:45:37-0:45:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:45:37):**  But I hope you guys realize that by saying that all the responsibility lies in your hands  now, right?  You have to pave the way.  And I'm grateful for that.  Thank you very much.  
**[0:45:50-0:45:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:45:50):**  I think it lies more in your hands, as much in your hands as in our hands.  Well, I won't give up.  That's for sure.  And to have you on my back, it's even better.  Thank you so much, all three.  
**[0:46:05-0:46:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:46:05):**  And we'll definitely be checking in.  Obviously, we're continuing with this series, but also it would be good at some point to  do an update when the dust settles a bit on the NoGrets initiative and see where you're  at.  Because as I checked, it was three years ago that I interviewed Celine, it was two years  
**[0:46:20-0:46:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:46:20):**  ago, actually plus a month that I interviewed Esther.  So it's more than over time, more than due for an update.  But that will be another episode.  Thank you so much for listening and I'll see you next time.  Thanks.  
**[0:46:32-0:46:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:46:32):**  Thank you for listening to this episode, which is part of the Transition Finance series,  trying to find appropriate transition finance to speed up regenerative agriculture on farms.  For feedback, ideas, suggestions, please contact us through Twitter or via the contact page  on the website, investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  Please share this episode with a friend and give us a five star rating, which really helps  
**[0:46:54-0:46:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:46:54):**  others to find the podcast.  All the episodes of the series can be found on the website and in your podcast app.  Thank you and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  
**[0:47:19-0:47:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:47:19):**  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  
**[0:47:39-0:47:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:47:39):**  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework?  What to focus on with the podcast?  How have we picked interviewees?  What questions should you ask?  
**[0:47:50-0:47:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:47:50):**  What is happening in the space?  What should you read?  What should you listen?  What should you watch?  How to approach this space?  
**[0:47:58-0:47:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:47:58):**  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in this space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management consultants, etc.  
**[0:48:16-0:48:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:48:16):**  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office or as private  individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through foundations,  institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  
**[0:48:32-0:48:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:48:32):**  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you and I'm very aware  that among the listeners of this podcast we have people with very different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you and if you have the means to  
**[0:48:51-0:48:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:48:51):**  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to ride along.  
**[0:49:04-0:49:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:49:04):**  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find or what kind of investors you could find  if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  
**[0:49:26-0:49:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:49:26):**  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design and a lot more.  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately that doesn't exist in this world.  
**[0:49:40-0:49:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/03/31/transition-finance-ep3/#t=0:49:40):**  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  Before making any investment please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  