### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2020-00-28)
**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:00:00):**  Do you want to learn more on how to put money to work in regenerative food and agriculture?  Follow our video course via investinginregenerativeagriculture.com or in the links below.  Now on to the podcast.  In this interview we dive deeper into what kind of systems thinking is necessary to design  investment products that really help farmers to transition towards regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:00:24-0:00:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:00:24):**  For instance a loan where the interest payments are tied to measurable changes in soil health.  And why farmers should be involved in every conversation and should be on the board of  any food, agriculture, agtech, but honestly any company.  Welcome to Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food.  This is a special dedicated series on transition finance.  
**[0:00:56-0:00:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:00:56):**  Why are we recording this series?  Many farmers are ready to speed up their regenerative transition.  They have looked for learning, done the courses, read the key books, hosted the gurus on their  farms, explored farm size regenerative designs and most importantly started their pilots  and feedback loops.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:01:12):**  This is where transition finance is key.  A local bank loan often isn't feasible because of the short duration, lack of flexibility  and the farmers lack of collateral.  Furthermore there is a limit of how much equity a farmer is able or willing to give away.  That is why my co-host aspiring to be regenerative farmer Benedikt Bösel and I are embarking  
**[0:01:34-0:01:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:01:34):**  on a journey to find out what are the key principles of transition finance for regenerative  farmers.  We are interviewing leading practitioners in the regenerative agriculture and food finance  space.  They share their insights how they would finance the speed up of the regenerative transition  
**[0:01:50-0:01:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:01:50):**  on Benedikt's 1000 hectares which is almost 2500 acres farm in Germany close to Berlin.  This is an open process.  We are sharing our lessons through the podcast episodes as we go along.  We don't have the answers yet, just a lot of questions.  So please share with us any examples of transition finance you have seen, other inspiration,  
**[0:02:10-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:02:10):**  people to interview etc.  Get in touch via the contact page on the website investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  That is investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  Robin O'Brien is the co-founder of Replant Capital, a new financial services firm.  Replant is creating financial products which addresses the most pressing issue of our time,  
**[0:02:31-0:02:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:02:31):**  climate change.  Through a series of innovative captive funds focused on direct investments, Replant is  partnering with farmers, ranchers, large food companies and technical assistance providers  to facilitate more resilient agriculture practices at scale.  Welcome Robin.  
**[0:02:46-0:02:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:02:46):**  Thanks so much for having me.  And welcome to this podcast on transition finance.  We both of us are very much looking forward to dive deeper into this topic.  But first a short intro.  We never had you on the podcast.  
**[0:02:56-0:03:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:02:56):**  What brings you to food, ag, soil and obviously Replant Capital, but let's stay.  What brings you to food and ag?  So my career has always been in the food industry.  I went to business school at Rice University and when I graduated, I joined a team and  we managed $20 billion in assets.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:03:11):**  I was the only female on the team.  So the guys had me cover the food industry.  So I learned the industry early on in my career in a very analytical way.  It was just simply data, earnings, just the statistics.  And then flash forward a few years, we had four children and all of a sudden I was looking  
**[0:03:27-0:03:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:03:27):**  at the food industry through the lens of a mother, as well as the lens that I had had  prior to this financial analyst.  And thankfully my mom is actually from New Zealand.  And so I was born with this dual citizenship and this sort of dual lens on the world, one  being seeing it through the ways that we do things as Americans and then the other through  
**[0:03:45-0:03:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:03:45):**  my mother's eyes, which was as a New Zealander.  And she was always saying, just because we do it one way here doesn't mean the rest of  the world does it that way.  And I grew up hearing that a lot over a lot of different things.  And so when our children started to get sick, my first place was, okay, well, what can I  
**[0:04:00-0:04:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:04:00):**  be doing in food?  And how can I be maybe better handling this as a mother when it comes to feeding the kids?  On top of that, we were thrown into the challenge of food allergies and the food allergy world  in the United States, it's massive.  The universe has grown so fast and unfortunately it impacts so many families.  
**[0:04:17-0:04:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:04:17):**  And my big question was why?  And so as I really started digging into food, quickly kind of landed on this big question  was, are we allergic to food or are we allergic to what's been done to it?  And as I began to ask that question, there were certain agrochemical companies that were  really upset that I was asking the question.  
**[0:04:33-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:04:33):**  There were other big CPG process food companies that also were really upset that I was asking  the question, but I couldn't not ask the question.  And so as I began to dig deeper into that, I reached back out to my analysts that I had  worked with at different companies like Goldman Sachs and Maryland, all these different analysts  and relationships that I had there.  
**[0:04:49-0:04:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:04:49):**  I was also reaching out into the pediatric world because now as a mother of four, I had  resources there and really trying to understand what we did not know about our food system  and how it might be impacting the developing immune system of a child.  I launched Allergy Kids Foundation.  We built an advisory board of people from the food industry and of course a medical  
**[0:05:08-0:05:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:05:08):**  advisory board who could inform us around that.  And as it continued to grow, it was really interesting.  I mean, I had different opportunities, Random House published my book, The Unhealthy Truth.  I was invited to give a TED talk.  That was probably one of the most terrifying moments of my life.  
**[0:05:23-0:05:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:05:23):**  But what was so interesting about that is that that talk was translated into dozens  of languages.  And so it really lands with where we are today and that this is really a global challenge.  We have a global opportunity in front of all of us to take the food system that we've inherited  and say, do we want to embrace this going forward and what pieces are actually needed  
**[0:05:42-0:05:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:05:42):**  and required to build a food system that works for the 21st century?  And it's not just for the 21st century consumer that now has diabetes or food allergies or  autism, Alzheimer's or cancer or any of these conditions now hammering so many of us, but  it's also how do you actually build a food system that works for the farmer?  And where we landed with Replant is the fact that in the United States, and it's not just  
**[0:06:05-0:06:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:06:05):**  in the United States, New Zealand has a similar problem, farmers are now carrying massive,  massive levels of debt.  And when you are strapped into debt, you don't have the freedom or flexibility to even  consider what might be possible.  And so what we've seen is there was this amazing PR campaign, this amazing financial campaign  
**[0:06:26-0:06:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:06:26):**  to really sell farmers in the United States on this operating system that is genetically  engineered and chemically intensive.  And it made a ton of sense for the chemical company Monsanto that was introducing it because  all of a sudden they were introducing a whole bunch of new revenue lines.  Instead of just selling their signature Roundup, they were selling Roundup ready soybeans and  
**[0:06:43-0:06:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:06:43):**  Roundup ready corn.  And all of a sudden, farmers were paying licensing fees and trade fees and royalty fees.  So their business model just blew up with the introduction of genetically engineered  crops because they could charge all of these different fees to the US farmer.  And as they did that, farmers were taking out more and more debt, taking on more and  
**[0:07:02-0:07:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:07:02):**  more loans in order to finance this transition into this chemically intensive operating system.  To the point now that US farmers carry over $426 billion in debt.  And the average median farm income now is somewhere around negative 1,500 bucks.  And so as I was learning that data, I thought, what happens to a country that doesn't have  farmers?  
**[0:07:27-0:07:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:07:27):**  And as I spoke to farmers, they were saying, my own kids don't want to step into this operating  model.  They don't want to step into the debt levels.  They don't want to step into the chemical loads.  They're not interested in being on the hook like this.  
**[0:07:40-0:07:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:07:40):**  And so the children of the farmers now in the United States, there's a real legacy issue  on the farm.  And that has really awakened this crisis, even more so than the opioid epidemics we're  seeing, more so than the suicide epidemics, more than the bankruptcies that we're seeing.  I think the legacy issue is probably one of the strongest reasons we're starting to see  
**[0:08:00-0:08:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:08:00):**  real change in the US.  And where the farmers come in, and they can come into us at Preplant.  They're in conversations with companies like Anheuser-Busch and Bev.  They're in conversations with companies like General Mills or Patagonia or Dr. Bronner's.  The farmers are coming in and saying, I don't know how to transition.  
**[0:08:17-0:08:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:08:17):**  I don't know on the technical side.  All I've known is this chemically intensive operating system.  I don't know how I'm going to finance this transition, because if it takes three years  to go from conventional agriculture to organic agriculture, what happens in that three-year  period?  
**[0:08:30-0:08:34](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:08:30):**  And then I don't know who's going to be a guaranteed buyer as I come out the other end  of that three-year period.  So we sort of looked at the problem and realized there was an enormous opportunity to come  in as a value-aligned, really well-educated capital partner and help the US farmers finance  this transition.  
**[0:08:48-0:08:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:08:48):**  So as we were having conversations with companies like General Mills and Nestle, they were saying,  we're bottlenecked.  We know that the consumer in the United States wants more regenerative organic food.  And 80% of consumers now in the US are purchasing something organic.  25% of all of our grocery store categories now carry something organic.  
**[0:09:06-0:09:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:09:06):**  But only 1% of farmland in the United States is organic.  And a percentage of a percentage of a percentage of that, even a tiny slice of that, is even  regenerative.  So we saw that as an enormous opportunity to really help fund and close that gap.  And the challenge is that a lot of these publicly traded companies, their shareholders, their  
**[0:09:27-0:09:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:09:27):**  capital is coming from the publicly traded markets.  And so on that quarterly earnings model, the demands are so extreme and so intense and  so high.  And I say that from an all-knowing perspective because we did that as a team.  We demanded so much from these publicly traded companies that they couldn't even consider  
**[0:09:46-0:09:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:09:46):**  beyond the next quarter.  They couldn't consider a three-year transition period to organics.  So we stepped back and thought, how do we create a capital source that can help come  in beside these large CPG companies, work with the farmers, provide the technical expertise  that is required by the farmers to then begin the transition process?  
**[0:10:08-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:10:08):**  And then by having the relationships with these large companies like Danone, or Anheuser-Busch  & Bev, or Driscoll, some of these big companies, you're bringing in a guaranteed buyer.  And so it's mitigating the risk for the farmer.  And so for us, that was really, as we started to really land on that as a solution, we realized  that it was an incredible opportunity not just for us here in the United States, but  
**[0:10:29-0:10:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:10:29):**  really farmers around the world.  So our attitude was clearly, this is critically important.  And how can we open source what we're doing so that more people have access to it?  So I'm really excited to be on this with you guys today.  Wow, Robin, I got to give it to you.  
**[0:10:48-0:10:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:10:48):**  I am always fascinated by these kind of people who are able to explain the most complex situation  and concepts in so nice and easy and fluid words.  If I would want to say the same smart things that you just said, I would probably need  55 minutes and no one would listen to me.  So thank you so much for that.  
**[0:11:07-0:11:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:11:07):**  That's really something to aim for.  But I mean, you covered just basically the whole idea and background of the podcast,  right?  I mean, there's pretty much anything you said is really why we're speaking right now.  And I think for me, one of the most interesting parts, I guess, is that the question of the  
**[0:11:26-0:11:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:11:26):**  deptness or being in debt and the dependency of farmers.  I think this is such a crucial point because it has to do with rural development in such  a strong way, right?  I mean, we have to empower farmers.  Farmers are the ones and the only ones in that regard who can do all those kind of things  
**[0:11:44-0:11:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:11:44):**  that we all want, biodiversity, climate mitigation, healthy food, and I mean, food as medicine  basically, right?  Providing in the rural area.  I mean, this is what farmers basically do and we need to help them.  We have to be able to give them the tools and the services that they need in order to  
**[0:12:03-0:12:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:12:03):**  do what we all want, right?  And as of today, I think it's more a situation where everyone has good advice and everyone  has an opinion and everyone has a good product that someone can buy, but really helping in  the end of the day, that's very few, right?  And coming to regenerative agriculture, I mean, when you talk about it and we look at  
**[0:12:24-0:12:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:12:24):**  the visionaries all over the world, everyone is like, oh my God, that's great.  Why don't we all do it?  Why don't everyone change, right?  And from the situation in Germany, what I see, and obviously that's very limited, but  it's still something that is really in our area, is there's certain situations that different  
**[0:12:47-0:12:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:12:47):**  farms are in.  First thing is in our area where we have very sandy soil and low precipitation, farmers  are fighting for their lives, fighting for the farms each and every day.  They don't have the emotional freedom to think beyond what they're already doing to keep  it alive, right?  
**[0:13:05-0:13:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:13:05):**  So we cannot ask them to do any changes.  And Falka Engelsmann from Eostar always says, how can I think green if my figures are red,  right?  I mean, that puts it beautifully.  So that's one part.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:13:16):**  The other one is they have invested into, let's say a big store, they've invested into  some sort of model of how they do their farm business and the bank wants to have the annuity  payments.  They don't care what you think would be good for animal health or whatever.  They will ask for the money and you're stuck in that system of paying back basically the  
**[0:13:40-0:13:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:13:40):**  debt obligation that you have.  So they can't change either, even if they want to, or they have really good soil, really  good water, and they're earning a lot.  They even get government subsidies on it.  So why would they change the system, right?  
**[0:13:54-0:14:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:13:54):**  So there's these different kind of situations that farmers are in, depending on, let's say,  the environment they're also faced in, where it is really a matter of, can you get out  of it?  And if so, how?  And that brings in that whole aspect of, we need a financial product that guides them  
**[0:14:13-0:14:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:14:13):**  and that helps them, that is a partner in that process.  That is basically, Cooney always say, they sit on the same side of the table, right?  And I think that's really the core of this series on an alternative way of, let's say,  financing farmers that are in transition.  I agree completely.  
**[0:14:32-0:14:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:14:32):**  And it's been really interesting.  I mean, I think your point, how can we think grain when our fingers are red?  We see that here too, where we sit down with farmers across the United States and just  as across Europe, you'd have different soil types and climates and water issues, depending  on the country that you're in.  
**[0:14:47-0:14:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:14:47):**  Here in the US, the states are very much like that.  So if we're talking to farmers in Texas or California or Minnesota or Nebraska, there  can be different sets of issues.  And as we initially were in those conversations to come in and support and try to work with  them on these solutions that they needed, it was really interesting.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:15:05):**  It was exactly your point.  It was, I can't think green.  I don't even have the time, the space, the bandwidth, the capacity.  I am literally trying to get through this day to day to day, especially as you throw  in all of these different issues like droughts and floods and the issues that are tied to  
**[0:15:22-0:15:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:15:22):**  climate and whether the farmers are now being impacted by, they're really just trying to  solve for that day to day.  And where we landed as a team was how do we offer sort of a menu of solutions that is  very well informed by our technical assistance partners, by farmers that we have worked with  and by the food companies.  
**[0:15:42-0:15:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:15:42):**  How can we actually provide that list of different opportunities for farmers to partner with  us so that they have the capital that they need to deploy, whatever their unique situation  might be.  And I think as you speak to farmers and these big food companies that are in the conversation  of how do we convert from conventional, chemically intensive agriculture to regenerative agriculture  
**[0:16:03-0:16:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:16:03):**  to build soil health, simple things.  It's things like cover crop seeds that need to be purchased and maybe there's different  equipment needs that need to be financed.  Depending on the crop, when we talk to Driscolls, the farm worker issue there is so critical.  It's absolutely critical and some of the issues they're seeing on their farms revolve around  
**[0:16:24-0:16:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:16:24):**  things like childcare.  So again, it's really this very holistic systems thinking that's required.  And unfortunately, I don't know, I can't speak to Italy or Germany, but here in the US we  lost sight of that a long time ago.  Can you walk us through an example, like a farm and try to describe it as visually, obviously,  
**[0:16:44-0:16:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:16:44):**  as we're in a podcast and as possible, like one of the farms and farmers you've worked  with and what were the items on the menu you shared and what were the items that ended  up working for that farmer?  Because I think the holistic view obviously is absolutely critical.  And then at the same time I hear the investor voice in the back of my mind saying, yeah,  
**[0:17:03-0:17:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:17:03):**  but it needs to be standardized.  Otherwise we cannot scale and we cannot replicate it.  So there's a constant tension between flexibility and a lot of different options and running  out of time, we need to probably transition.  I don't know how many millions of farmers.  
**[0:17:18-0:17:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:17:18):**  So how do we do that?  So can you walk us through one example or two examples that really give a great way  of seeing basically the toolbox you have, the menu you've been working with?  So I think probably the first thing that comes to mind is the technical expertise and the  technical assistance that is required on the farm, which is a farmer to farmer thing.  
**[0:17:39-0:17:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:17:39):**  They don't want to hear from us.  They don't want to hear from some finance group in Oakland or Boulder.  They want to hear from those people on the ground who can actually assist them in that  technical transition and in the know-how.  And so for us, it's so critically important that we bring on these technical assistance  
**[0:17:56-0:18:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:17:56):**  partners and one of them, Ecopractices, they're extraordinary.  They are definitely our knowledge base on so much of this.  When we have a question around farmer needs, we go to them.  They're Kansas and Missouri based and they're able to inform us on what they're seeing directly  on the ground in their communities.  
**[0:18:13-0:18:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:18:13):**  Again, it's a localized solution.  And so if we're working with farmers in Ohio, that technical assistance partner is going  to look very different because a lot of the farmers in Ohio are Amish and therefore they're  not using technology.  So how do you actually work to create some of these solutions that normally involve technological  
**[0:18:33-0:18:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:18:33):**  platforms or at the very least cell phones and how can you work with the Amish farmers  in this transition process?  What's been really interesting there is just in the last couple of years, the farmers have  embraced using cell phone technology on farm during daylight hours to better inform them  around soil health and around the practices and the better practices, especially in transition.  
**[0:18:54-0:18:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:18:54):**  But I think the biggest needs that we're hearing are cover crop.  It's around cover cropping.  I think that when a farmer has been growing conventionally using the agrochemicals suite  of portfolio for the last 20 years to really kind of start with something as simple as  cover crops, it does not feel intimidating.  
**[0:19:13-0:19:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:19:13):**  It feels accessible.  You then quickly step into the needs that would be required for equipment.  Another area that we're focusing on is water conservation, water metrics.  And so different farmers, especially when we're talking to dairy farmers, they're really  interested in how they can be smarter about water conservation on their farm.  
**[0:19:33-0:19:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:19:33):**  So again, we sort of, for the last 20 years under Monsanto and companies like that, we've  lived under this model of one size fits all.  And that's what actually broke agriculture.  What we're stepping back from is sort of saying, let's actually decentralize this and let's  honor the fact that we localize these solutions.  
**[0:19:51-0:19:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:19:51):**  It's not one size fits all.  You lean into the expertise of a given region or area or collection of farmers and you work  specifically with them.  So again, for us, it's, we're not here to dictate what that is.  We're here to sit down at the table and figure out how to finance it.  
**[0:20:06-0:20:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:20:06):**  And you would end up financing the cover crops for this farmer, or you would end up financing  the water sensors, et cetera, to the moisture sensors to help save water.  That would be the part replant does, or how would that work?  That's part of what we do.  We think of it as a pie chart.  
**[0:20:21-0:20:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:20:21):**  So it's like, definitely that's a piece of the pie.  Those are pieces of the pie.  We're also hearing from farmers who, as they began their transition to organic agriculture,  they were very much conventional using a bunch of chemical inputs.  As they shifted to regenerative, they felt that was probably the most reachable.  
**[0:20:39-0:20:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:20:39):**  And so as they shifted from conventional to regenerative, what they saw was an improvement  in soil health.  They were able to save half a million bucks a year on chemical inputs.  And then all of a sudden, once they're in that regenerative space, the few steps out  to organic don't feel as far away.  
**[0:20:57-0:21:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:20:57):**  And they can see that if they were to go all the way to organic, there's a premium there  for those crops.  So where regenerative has enabled enormous cost savings, organic then enables that premium  on that side in terms of when they're selling their crops into the market.  And so we have heard from farmers who, once they're in motion like that, they're like,  
**[0:21:15-0:21:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:21:15):**  look, I have 7,000 acres under management that are organic.  I want to acquire 2,000 more.  So it's, again, helping that farmer finance that acquisition and that expansion to more  organic acreage.  It's really important distinction because we are starting with the soil fund and it  
**[0:21:34-0:21:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:21:34):**  is a loan fund.  And it's really kind of getting at these debt levels and really helping to tackle it and  really helping to bring it down so that the farmer has more flexibility and more autonomy  in his decision making because we see that that's part of the problem.  I mean, you can't, with so much debt and so much that's required under that debt, there  
**[0:21:54-0:21:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:21:54):**  hasn't been a whole lot of breathing room for the farmer.  So by coming in really as a loan fund, that's our focus.  A lot of people have said, well, would you want to buy the, do you want to buy the land?  We don't want to be landlords.  That's not the business model that we're creating.  
**[0:22:07-0:22:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:22:07):**  It's really the soil funds or loan funds that are really helping figure out how we can help  farmers transition their crops to regenerative organic agriculture.  What I always think in this regard, and you mentioned it, or you touched upon this quite  nicely just now, like we always, when we think agriculture, when we talk agriculture, what  we all think of all the time is primary production of food.  
**[0:22:35-0:22:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:22:35):**  And obviously that's what we're doing.  And then this starts at basically two routes of thinking about this.  On one side, this goes back to the whole idea of true cost accounting or true cost of food.  We think about the negative externalities of our production model and we try to basically  monitor them and monetize them and say, okay, basically we have to reduce those negative  
**[0:22:59-0:23:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:22:59):**  consequences of the production models.  And then you can split that up between conventional, organic, regenerative, whatever it is.  That's coming from basically the more negative side.  But I prefer to look at it the other way around and think about what kind of values do we  actually create by doing what we're doing.  
**[0:23:20-0:23:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:23:20):**  So obviously we're producing food, but we're also taking care of the land.  We're also taking care of the animals.  We also take care of basically the aesthetics of it.  We also take care of the environment in some way.  And that has value to it.  
**[0:23:34-0:23:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:23:34):**  It has value that you can basically monitor, you can monetize it.  So when we talk about climate change, when we talk about the kind of problems that we  face as a society on a worldwide level, don't we have to completely change the talk and  the topic and the view how we see basically agriculturalists, but also people who are  in the forestry who actually do take care of the land.  
**[0:24:00-0:24:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:24:00):**  They're basically caretakers of the land and they produce food, but they have so many other  tasks that they fulfill.  And don't we have to think in a whole new way of basically paying for those kinds of  services that they basically do for all of us, right?  Well, I think you're starting to see that with the emergence of this B Corp certification  
**[0:24:23-0:24:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:24:23):**  and J. Cohen Gilbert is a friend of our teams and one of my co-founders, Don Schaefer, he  was on the founding board of B Corp and B Lab.  And I think, again, it's a much more encompassing value system in terms of those models.  And I agree completely.  The farmer, unfortunately, the language around farming in the United States and it sounds  
**[0:24:45-0:24:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:24:45):**  like around the world was focused on yield and that that was the only value that a farmer  was producing was yield.  And when we sit down with farmers here in the United States now, they're like, that  was so misguided to only focus on yield because soil health has been destroyed in some cases,  profitability has been destroyed.  
**[0:25:04-0:25:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:25:04):**  There's bankruptcy, there's mental health crisis that's happening on the farm.  By only focusing on yield, we ignored so much.  And if you can step back and say, okay, let's think about it.  What if we were to focus on profitability for the farmer?  What would that actually look like?  
**[0:25:20-0:25:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:25:20):**  That includes exactly what you're saying, which is building soil health.  So as a financial services firm that's in this space, our loans are tied to soil health  and no one's ever done that before, but it's why we have these third party partners because  they offer metrics for us that help inform us on the terms of our loan.  And so a farmer, if he is demonstrating improved soil health, higher organic nutrient density  
**[0:25:46-0:25:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:25:46):**  in the soil health, water conservation, water infiltration, carbon sequestration, those  are all things that you can measure when it comes to soil health.  The stronger those metrics are, the lower his cost of capital.  And to really think about aligning the incentives because he's already doing the work or she's  already doing that work, but she's never been compensated for it directly.  
**[0:26:08-0:26:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:26:08):**  And so by tying the cost of capital to the health of the soil, you're actually being  compensated directly for those better practices.  So instead of the focus only being on yield, all of a sudden we've said, hey, you know  what, our focus is on soil health and these are the metrics and these are the way that  we're capturing it.  
**[0:26:27-0:26:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:26:27):**  And just to give an understanding, what is the, because this is revolutionary, as you  said, I haven't heard anybody connecting soil health specifically to the cost of capital.  What is the range that it fluctuates as an example, if you have an example, like is it  a significant difference if I, as a farmer work really, really hard to improve my soil  health?  
**[0:26:49-0:26:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:26:49):**  Do I see that and like significantly back in a lower cost of capital?  I think, you know, for us, I wish I had more data to give you as it relates to that, but  we're right out of the gate.  So I don't, unfortunately right now.  But what I will say is that by having partners like Danone that are B Corp certified and  
**[0:27:05-0:27:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:27:05):**  thinking much more in terms of stakeholders, not just shareholders, it enables us to deliver  those returns at the farm level in a way that hasn't happened before.  And so for example, with Danone, you know, if there's a third party technical assistance  partner in some cases they say, you know, we're going to step in and we're actually  going to cover the cost of that because we understand the value that it's bringing to  
**[0:27:27-0:27:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:27:27):**  our supply chain.  So again, you know, it's recognizing that the most critical piece in the food system  is actually happening at the soil level, which the farmer is a steward of.  And so to really bring that into the conversation, what has been absolutely shocking is how few  of these large global food companies actually have those direct relationships with their  
**[0:27:48-0:27:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:27:48):**  growers and with their farmers.  Danone is extraordinary because they know they're 700 plus dairy farmers.  And Heiser Busch and Bev is the same way, they've got over 700 barley growers, they  have direct relationships with them.  Driscoll's is another one.  
**[0:28:03-0:28:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:28:03):**  They have over 700 family farmers.  They've got absolutely direct relationships with them.  And I think again, you know, we step out of the 20th century into the 21st century and  that transparency is required for a successful food system.  So the companies that don't have that direct relationship with their farmers and with their  
**[0:28:21-0:28:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:28:21):**  growers and that really are kind of blind to the procurement side of things, they're  quickly trying to get to know them, which is great.  But I think, you know, again, it's not a one size fits all model.  So it's going to depend brand to brand and really kind of the types of fields that the  farmers are managing, how that equation is actually going to play out.  
**[0:28:42-0:28:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:28:42):**  And would you be able to share, I mean, not now probably, but you mentioned open source,  your process obviously before, like how do you connect a loan product to the soil health?  Like what, which obviously is going to be different in different parts, but I'm imagining  that in a few months or maybe in a year when this is going, how do you actually do that?  Because I think a lot of people would say, wow, sounds amazing, but sounds also very  
**[0:29:08-0:29:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:29:08):**  complicated.  I mean, I think it would be if you didn't have partners like we have with eco practices.  So that team is a bunch of agronomists with a bunch of just absolute data jockeys.  So they're able to capture this information as it relates to soil health, everything we're  talking about, carbon, nutrient density, organic matter, water conservation, they can capture  
**[0:29:26-0:29:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:29:26):**  those metrics.  And again, that's been the focus of their business model is eco practices, capturing  the metrics of soil health.  So by bringing them in as a third party partner, not as something that's part of replant, but  as something that is independent of us, they're actually reporting on that data and those  
**[0:29:41-0:29:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:29:41):**  metrics.  And that can inform us as we sit down to structure the loans with the farmers.  The experience that we are tapping into my two co-founders, Dave Haynes and Don Schaefer.  Don was CEO of RSF Social Finance.  So he has spent a decade there as CEO doing exactly this, integrated capital, creating  
**[0:30:02-0:30:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:30:02):**  these innovative loan terms.  So that's his background.  Dave Haynes was private equity.  He's been in the food space the same as I have for his entire career.  And he has also brought incredible expertise in terms of what it looks like to actually  
**[0:30:16-0:30:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:30:16):**  structure these financial packages for these different farmers in these different companies.  So for us, it's sort of taking that collective expertise of an eco practices with RSF Social  Finance and bringing it together and saying we've actually got to think about the way  we finance farmers in a different, new and more innovative way.  Yeah, I thought also something you mentioned.  
**[0:30:39-0:30:46](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:30:39):**  It's quite interesting because I think what we need in that whole discussion and I think  the crisis that we're all currently facing through Corona is something that might add  some new potential to it.  But we totally have to change the narrative.  We are so caught up in emotional fights about who is right and who is wrong.  
**[0:31:05-0:31:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:31:05):**  And with that comes so much pain and lost energy because we're all just putting all  the energy in the discussion and not really thinking about solutions.  But the thing is that we're fighting around the topic if convention is the right way or  ecological is the right way or this or that or whatever.  And there is not one testable or one provable claim, so to say.  
**[0:31:33-0:31:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:31:33):**  Everyone has his own thoughts or her own thoughts and that's okay.  But what I think many of us, if not all of us can agree on that farmers are left out  of the conversations or put it differently, farmers are at the moment just not earning  the incomes.  Farmers are in the situation where they cannot be in.  
**[0:31:54-0:31:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:31:54):**  They're dependent.  They have debt.  They are in bad situations pretty much all over the world.  We can more or less all agree on that.  So that alone is a reason to say, hey, everyone who is involved from the farmer, him or herself,  
**[0:32:11-0:32:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:32:11):**  throughout the whole value chain up to the politicians, we have to change the system.  And now the solution or now the discussion should not be, is this the right way or that  the right way?  Because that doesn't help.  And there's many thousands of right ways always depending on your thoughts, your ethics, your  
**[0:32:28-0:32:30](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:32:28):**  machinery, your market entry, whatever.  But what we all agree on is we need to find a new way.  And what's that new way going to look like?  And what does that incorporate?  I think that whole idea of actually finding a new narrative, which is not emotionally  
**[0:32:44-0:32:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:32:44):**  so already fed up with, I guess, is really something that we can all maybe draw more  focus on and then from that start to actually start talking about solutions.  Again, and I think it's 100 percent and in the conversations we've been having over the  last several weeks as this coronavirus hits the globe is, you know, here in the United  States is exposed incredible vulnerabilities in the food system.  
**[0:33:10-0:33:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:33:10):**  And one of the first being that most of our farm workers, unfortunately, have not been  granted legal status.  So here they are providing one of the most fundamental, fundamental, critical services  to our country.  And yet we haven't even granted them legal status.  
**[0:33:25-0:33:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:33:25):**  And some might come back and say, oh, well, those are jobs that could be reserved for  Americans.  But, you know, study after study shows that when those jobs are posted, Americans aren't  they're not signing up to to bend over backwards in the fields, you know, picking strawberries  all day long.  
**[0:33:38-0:33:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:33:38):**  So, again, it's really it's really saying, how do we actually how do we actually build  a sustainable food system?  And that's that is from the farm level, farm worker level, all the way through the truckers,  through the cashiers, to the grocery store clerks, to the companies and the industries  that are that are helping feed the world.  
**[0:33:59-0:34:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:33:59):**  And so, again, it's I think we sort of we built out this system without without thinking  through the long term consequences.  And now even in the short term consequences, the impact and the externalized costs.  And, you know, again, there were brilliant marketing models put forward and brilliant  PR campaigns put forward about how this agrochemical operating system was going to feed the world.  
**[0:34:22-0:34:25](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:34:22):**  According to the United Nations and according to the USDA, 40 percent of the food that we  produce is wasted and thrown away.  So, again, you know, is it a production problem or is it actually a distribution problem?  And how do we actually solve for this?  And most importantly, how do we do it in a transparent way?  
**[0:34:37-0:34:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:34:37):**  So how do we bring transparency to the absolute financial and economic devastation that our  farmers are seeing so that people are aware of that?  And that's been a focus of mine for a really good part of my career.  I'm actually named after a farmer in New Zealand.  And so it's it's very personal.  
**[0:34:51-0:34:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:34:51):**  So how do we bring how do we bring a real awareness to the fact that we've created a  situation for farming in the United States and around the world that's made it so that  the next generation does not want to step into that as a career?  And that puts so much at risk.  So how do we actually rethink the economic and financial situations of farming in America,  
**[0:35:11-0:35:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:35:11):**  farming in Germany, farming in Europe, you know, wherever it might be farming in New  Zealand so that younger generations are looking at that as viable, lucrative careers that  they actually want to step into?  Because that doesn't exist right now.  And that's the food crisis that's a couple of years out.  
**[0:35:29-0:35:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:35:29):**  Do you see like a growing interest?  Because we see the same here in Europe.  Suddenly people are exposed to empty shelves in the supermarket and you never had to think  about that.  And suddenly people are I just heard from a local food company in the Netherlands that  
**[0:35:46-0:35:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:35:46):**  basically overnight doubled their amount of customers in a week.  Sorry, not overnight.  Double their amount of customers and every one of those customers ordered 30 percent  more than they usually did, meaning that they even grew more in a week.  And I hear that from many different places like the local food scene, unless you are  
**[0:36:01-0:36:05](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:36:01):**  very exposed to restaurants, obviously, is booming.  Do you see that on the farmer side of things as well?  Is there or are we too early in that crisis to see a certain awakening moment?  I cannot be just a monoculture selling to one customer or one client or one wholesaler  and that's it.  
**[0:36:21-0:36:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:36:21):**  I'm very fragile in that system.  Or is it are we too early to see that?  And are we just maybe I wouldn't say hoping, but looking for these little lights in a very  dark period?  I think, you know, the invitation is going to be to creatively disrupt this current model.  
**[0:36:36-0:36:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:36:36):**  And, you know, one of the conversations we had yesterday was with the president of Driscoll's  and he was talking about how for anybody that doesn't know Driscoll's, what does Driscoll's  do?  Driscoll's is raspberries, strawberries, blackberries, blueberries, heavily based in California,  but also globally, China, around the world.  
**[0:36:56-0:37:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:36:56):**  And what I love about him is he is from Denmark and he is a systems thinker.  And so he, again, will go high level and kind of observe best practices that are happening  around the world.  And one of the points he made on our call yesterday was that tomato growers in Florida  are being absolutely hammered by this disruption with this virus right now because predominantly  
**[0:37:22-0:37:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:37:22):**  they sell into food services, whereas Driscoll's, the berry grower only has not only but 8 percent  of their business is going into food service.  So all of a sudden you've got tomato growers where the majority of their business was going  into food service, so cafeteria, school cafeterias, business cafeterias, and it is shut down.  You know, and you can't suddenly like repopulate those fields quickly.  
**[0:37:43-0:37:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:37:43):**  You know, that tomato stuff is being donated to food banks, donated to shelters, and it's  out.  You know, so his point was, you know, you better anticipate the cost of things like  spaghetti sauce to start going through the roof because that was the tomato supply that  just basically had to be donated because that market that they had always sold into and  
**[0:38:03-0:38:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:38:03):**  really relied on as a primary source of their revenue went away.  So again, that one size fits all proved really detrimental.  So again, how do we diversify?  How do we bring transparency to this?  What's interesting is that the food service companies themselves with the shutdown that's  
**[0:38:21-0:38:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:38:21):**  happening of these, you know, massive cafeterias that they've been putting product into for  decades, they realized that they could start to sell stuff individually.  So you know, they're doing food drops, you know, residential food drops.  I mean, it's fascinating kind of what this crisis is creating in terms of opportunities  and innovations and new models going forward.  
**[0:38:41-0:38:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:38:41):**  I think probably the worst decision that could have possibly been made was that any of these  companies existed without farmers on their board.  So when we talk to any of these startups or any of the companies that come to us and,  you know, are interested in what we're doing or interested in trying to secure capital,  whether we're referring them to partners, you know, my first question is always, do  
**[0:39:04-0:39:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:39:04):**  you have a farmer on your board?  And unfortunately, most of them don't.  They don't think that way.  And so you've got these brilliant minds coming out of the tech world, coming out of Silicon  Valley.  
**[0:39:16-0:39:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:39:16):**  And, you know, again, they truly, truly are sincerely trying to help.  They're trying to create solutions that are really tackling some of these systemic issues  in the food system, whether it's water, soil health, you know, different ways that they  can leverage ag technology on the farm.  But unless there's a farmer who is core on that team, you could be creating something  
**[0:39:35-0:39:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:39:35):**  that's never going to be used or adopted on the farm.  And then that's hundreds of millions of dollars that's been wasted that really we can't afford  to waste at this time.  So like you're saying, you know, again, it's we've sort of treated the farmer as this sort  of servant slave labor, this lower part of society, simply focusing on yields, when really  
**[0:39:56-0:39:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:39:56):**  the value they're providing is so much greater.  And I think, you know, we're starting to understand globally the power that soil has as a carbon  sink and that soils fundamental job before growing food for any of us, before anything  else, soil's job is to capture carbon and store it.  And when we've destroyed soil the way we have through these agrochemical systems, it's unable  
**[0:40:18-0:40:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:40:18):**  to do the job it actually was designed to do.  So with farmers, what you're seeing is, you know, their yields are declining because they've  been pouring these chemicals and treating their crops for the last 20 or 30 years.  So as they begin to focus on soil health, what they're finding is that yields begin  to improve because, you know, again, there's water conservation, there's soil organic matter.  
**[0:40:38-0:40:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:40:38):**  So to recognize that the farmers play this role so far beyond yields and so far beyond  these ingredient inputs that they're feeding into the food companies.  And you know, one of the things I wish that we could do, which, you know, B Corp and B  Lab, they're sort of moving this way and people are beginning to think this way, but you know,  soil needs to be on the balance sheet of every company, water needs to be on the balance  
**[0:41:05-0:41:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:41:05):**  sheet of every company, clean air needs to be on the balance sheet of every company because  those companies can't run.  They don't exist without those three assets.  And unfortunately, we haven't included those in these models for these companies, whether  it's in the food industry or other.  
**[0:41:20-0:41:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:41:20):**  So there's enormous opportunity, I think, for people to engage.  I heard from somebody at Richard Branson's office, and they were interested in the food  space, there wasn't a ton of interest there.  And I said, you know, talk to me a little bit about the model.  And he launched into this conversation about travel and transport and leisure, and that's  
**[0:41:39-0:41:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:41:39):**  their focus.  And that's why they're not focusing on food.  And I sort of stopped him and I said, listen, Joe, you know, what if Richard Branson was  to launch Virgin Farms?  And what if Virgin Farms were solar and wind powered?  
**[0:41:52-0:41:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:41:52):**  So you have, you know, renewable energy as part of that definition of regenerative, which  is how we see it at Replant, is that if you're going to have regenerative agriculture, it  includes renewable energy.  So let's say Virgin Farms has solar and wind on those farms.  And then it's also growing regenerative organic crops that are part of its system, you know,  
**[0:42:10-0:42:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:42:10):**  that are feeding into all of the transport, travel and leisure programs that they've got  in place.  Imagine the power that Virgin would have with those farms capturing carbon, providing all  of this renewable energy.  And again, it's how do we think about any of these systems, any of these industries  
**[0:42:28-0:42:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:42:28):**  and any of these corporations?  How do we think about it more as a closed loop so that these costs are not being externalized?  And in order to close that loop, you've got to have farmers at the table.  I totally agree.  I mean, in so many ways, you know, we all have an opinion and wishes and hopes and good  
**[0:42:46-0:42:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:42:46):**  ideas and whatnot about the way we should do farming and what we all want from farming.  But the farmers are most of the time left out of the conversation.  But I mean, the thing is, I mean, I spoke to this amazing guy, Christian, he founded  the Regional-Wert AG in Freiburg, which is basically a new way of getting, basically  getting a public group of interested, like, let's say, private people to invest into basically  
**[0:43:20-0:43:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:43:20):**  a structure that then enables farmers to do certain ecological farming, basically, a model  that all of you are probably aware of.  And he basically also started that whole idea of basically the value of farming and putting  that into a much broader perspective.  And he came from exactly how you basically pointed it out from the sort of the financial  
**[0:43:42-0:43:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:43:42):**  side of it.  Like, let's put those kind of numbers into the balance sheet.  You know, that's real accounting.  This is sort of the accounting approach that we need.  And pretty much, I would say, anyone involved in this and all the farmers, they are obviously  
**[0:43:59-0:44:01](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:43:59):**  all completely agree with it.  They're like, okay, this is the way we should do it.  And it makes so much sense.  But the problem is, and this is basically my question for you, Robin, is like, we need  politics and politicians to work with that, to be open to those new concepts to say, okay,  
**[0:44:19-0:44:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:44:19):**  let's take this work upon us.  Let's try to incorporate it into our policy approaches.  Let's actually take this as a starting point and be this basically the new standard of  doing things.  And if they don't do it, we will never get that reach.  
**[0:44:33-0:44:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:44:33):**  We will never take those kind of development steps that we need in order to scale it or  to bring it into a larger group.  So politics plays such a huge, immense role.  So what's your experience?  What's your thought on that?  
**[0:44:48-0:44:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:44:48):**  How can we basically lighten up their spirits and their motivation to, you know, it's work.  It's a new approach.  You know, you've got to do things, you've got to think differently.  And how can we facilitate it?  How can we help, you know, bringing people, especially politicians to be open to that  
**[0:45:06-0:45:08](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:45:06):**  and to be willing to change?  What are your experience?  What are your thoughts?  That's a great question.  And I, for better or worse, do have a fair amount of policy experience.  
**[0:45:16-0:45:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:45:16):**  I first started around legislation for food allergies, just labeling, you know, it's really  that was 15 years ago, born out of a desire to protect a child I had with food allergies.  And I'm grateful for it because at the time I just went to my local congressman and said,  look, here's the data.  This is the statistic.  
**[0:45:35-0:45:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:45:35):**  This is how many children have food allergies.  This is how it's impacting society.  And it was just data.  I was incredibly intimidated.  I had this vision of some politician behind this giant mahogany desk and that it was going  
**[0:45:47-0:45:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:45:47):**  to be really intimidating and I was going to feel really stupid and not able to do what  I was hoping I would be able to do because I had no idea what the process was like.  But I knew I had to start.  And what was fascinating is that the first level then when you're working with any kind  of policy change or policymaker is really a bunch of 20 something, early 30 something  
**[0:46:08-0:46:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:46:08):**  year olds who are super passionate about these issues.  So whatever your perception might be for the person behind the desk who may have been in  Congress or in government for 30 years, that frontline is a bunch of really energetic young  people.  And that was probably the first thing I learned was these are the first hands that these issues  
**[0:46:28-0:46:29](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:46:28):**  get into.  And this issue, this particular issue is so relevant to them.  So to not be intimidated by beginning the process because that guy behind the mahogany  desk you may or may not ever see.  The most interaction you're going to be having is with a lot of the staff, which is late  
**[0:46:45-0:46:50](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:46:45):**  20s, early 30s and really dialed into a lot of these issues in the 21st century.  And then beyond that food allergy legislation, I then did a lot of work over a lot of years  around labeling genetically engineered ingredients in the United States.  I was a founding board member of Just Label It, which was an organization that Gary Hirschberg  of Stonyfield started to really bring labeling to genetically engineered foods.  
**[0:47:09-0:47:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:47:09):**  And what was fascinating is while we were trying to accomplish that at the national  level, the states began to really push for that labeling at the state level.  And that was the most important lesson that I learned on policy is you have got to start  local.  When you start local, people are empowered to participate.  
**[0:47:30-0:47:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:47:30):**  And what we're asking for is for participation because there is no progress without participation.  So by working with your local legislators first, you actually can get somewhere pretty  quickly and pretty fast.  Our local congressman is now the governor of Colorado.  When we first sat down together, he told me, he said, you know, I know when somebody has  
**[0:47:52-0:47:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:47:52):**  sent a letter or sent an email that there are dozens of other constituents who feel  the same way who just haven't taken the time to actually sit down and send that email or  send that letter.  And so, you know, again, like you really have got to focus on progress, not perfection.  We haven't inherited a food system that has been broken for at least 50 years.  
**[0:48:11-0:48:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:48:11):**  We're not going to fix that overnight.  But as we begin to work with our local legislators, you know, our state level legislators, we  can really begin to create change.  So what was fascinating was at the national level, we were advocating for the labeling  of genetically engineered foods.  
**[0:48:26-0:48:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:48:26):**  The state initiatives began to take off.  The funding that we were up against was enormous.  So for example, in the state of Colorado, you know, the industry, the food industry,  the agrochemical groups, they put in something like $20 million.  I don't think the state of Colorado that was pro labeling that side raised even a million.  
**[0:48:45-0:48:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:48:45):**  So we were completely outspent.  But what it created was an education campaign.  And all of a sudden, the consumers that had no idea how food was grown or that this process  had even been implemented and was executed on farm, all of a sudden, consumers were learning  about genetically engineered crops, the portfolio of chemicals required to grow them, and they  
**[0:49:03-0:49:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:49:03):**  began to opt out.  And so the market changed.  So my answer is policy follows the money.  So it's not a neither or, it's a both and.  So on the one hand, yes, you know, for those people that get really excited and really  
**[0:49:16-0:49:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:49:16):**  want to get involved and active on the policy side of things, we really, really need you.  That was not me.  I had to really learn how to do that.  And I really had to lean into it.  And it's incredibly inspiring work.  
**[0:49:29-0:49:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:49:29):**  And it also, it feels very much like you're really at the heart of the fabric of kind  of the constitution or whatever the regulations are that your country was built on.  So it's an incredibly inspiring work, but it's a long game, and it's not going to change  overnight.  What you can change is the consumer patterns and the consumer buying behavior.  
**[0:49:49-0:49:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:49:49):**  And so one of the things that we heard under the Obama administration when we were working  on GMO labeling was basically, you have to give me political cover.  So has the movement grown enough to create the political cover that the politicians need?  So again, it's not either or, but it's both and.  And again, I think where we are now is 80% of consumers are buying something organic  
**[0:50:11-0:50:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:50:11):**  and 75% of grocery store categories are now carrying something organic.  So clearly, there's an awareness, the education has worked, people are shifting into free  from food purchases.  And as that happens, the policy continues to play out.  So to me, we've got to be running both those things at the same time.  
**[0:50:35-0:50:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:50:35):**  What would be your advice?  Because it sounds, I mean, the policy part definitely follows and at some point is in  front and it really depends on the pieces, depends on the regions.  We have a region here in actually up in the Alps in Italy that have banned all glyphosate  and all chemical, basically chemical inputs because they found a lot of the residues in  
**[0:50:56-0:51:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:50:56):**  children, diapers, etc. in way beyond the fields.  Because of course, the farmers promised that it would only stay in the fields and would  never go beyond the apple orchards they were spraying.  And they found that and they actually did a referendum, it was a huge local movement,  did a referendum, gave them a number of years to either move or transition to organic.  
**[0:51:14-0:51:15](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:51:14):**  And that has been spreading.  So it's either moving really fast because a number of farmers are moving or it's moving  fast because of concerned consumers, etc.  But I want to be conscious of your time as well to finalize with a few questions.  What would be your advice to, because we don't have a replanting Europe or at least not that  
**[0:51:31-0:51:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:51:31):**  we know of or in Germany, what would be your advice to a farmer like Benedict that is considering  taking maybe on outside capital, but maybe also not?  How to approach investors?  And actually also that's a question, who are your current investors that are investing  in these farmers or indirectly investing in these farmers?  
**[0:51:50-0:51:53](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:51:50):**  Is there something we can learn as Benedict is?  And we are talking to financial groups and investors here in Europe that are interested  in transition finance, but don't really know where to start.  That's a great question.  So, you know, I think there's an enormous opportunity to educate and farmers are some  
**[0:52:09-0:52:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:52:09):**  of the most incredible ambassadors for that.  Some of the farmers and ranchers that we work with at Replant are incredible when they get  in front of an audience and can explain and articulate this.  And the power that soil has as a carbon sink and what that actually means to their yields  because it's coming from such a true place.  
**[0:52:27-0:52:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:52:27):**  So again, you know, to really elevate the status and the authority of a farmer in our  food system is critical.  So if those opportunities exist, if you're invited to speak on a podcast, if you're invited  to speak at a conference, if you are a farmer, say yes.  And trust that you know more than most people on the subject matter and you're not going  
**[0:52:48-0:52:51](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:52:48):**  to screw up the lines because it's the life you've led.  You're telling your own story.  So you're not going to screw up the lines.  So don't be intimidated by stepping into that leadership role and that voice of authority  on these issues, because we really need farmers to step forward.  
**[0:53:04-0:53:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:53:04):**  In terms of capital, I think, you know, again, it's being really clear on who you are and  what you need so that those capital partners can find you.  And I think this the story of soil is a powerful carbon sink.  That's a climate story.  And once investors realize that that's a way for them to allocate resources for clients  
**[0:53:25-0:53:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:53:25):**  that are really focused on climate, you suddenly have a new opportunity.  But again, you know, I understand that unfortunately, the resources in the capital markets are not  there yet.  They are growing quickly.  Rabobank is a group in Europe that is one of the most forward thinking.  
**[0:53:44-0:53:48](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:53:44):**  And I've had the privilege and joy, really, it was a lot of fun to work with them on some  different initiatives here in the United States.  So as an institution in Europe, they are one of the most forward thinking.  And then again, it's really, I think, to really kind of build coalitions.  So again, for Benedict and others to really find other like minded farmers and think about  
**[0:54:08-0:54:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:54:08):**  how you guys can come together, because it's far less intimidating when you're going out  on these new initiatives, if you're doing it as a team.  Yeah, I totally agree.  I think that's really a crucial point.  I would have asked this early on, actually, because you mentioned a couple of times also  
**[0:54:25-0:54:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:54:25):**  the connection between farmers and then potential, you know, large, large wholesalers, for examples.  And that's always the question of critical mass, right?  Because I think, as of now, as lead in Germany, if you approach this new way, if you speak  to any potential buyer of your product, they'll be like, yeah, I mean, sounds cool.  Like let me know when you've got it, and then we'll talk basically, right?  
**[0:54:51-0:54:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:54:51):**  So to have that upfront, basically, security of saying, hey, if you can provide me with  product XYZ at this and that quality, I will buy it for this and that price, you can't  get that as of now.  So I think finding other farmers around your area, finding other farmers who basically  approach the same, let's say, I guess, journey that you are, I think that's really critical,  
**[0:55:16-0:55:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:55:16):**  because you can not only speak about the experience and the mistakes that you're probably going  to do plenty of, but you can also talk about, look, we've got certain products, we've got  certain things that we can offer as a group in a way, right?  And that makes the attractiveness of it to a large buyer much, much higher as well, right?  So I think that's such an important part of it.  
**[0:55:38-0:55:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:55:38):**  Yeah, I totally agree.  And I mean, again, I think, you know, we're building a system that hasn't existed before.  So give yourself permission for the grace and flexibility that's required in that and  that we are going to fall down, we are going to trip and fall.  The important thing is you get up and you keep going.  
**[0:55:53-0:55:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:55:53):**  And I think it's also why, you know, to have colleagues beside you, as we work through  this, just psychologically, it's really important because then you know, you're not going it  alone, that you've got somebody beside you kind of looking out for you, as we all navigate  this.  I think with that, I have the feeling, but I usually have this when we do a podcast,  
**[0:56:14-0:56:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:56:14):**  we really scratch the surface, there's so much more to dive into to unpack, as we're  building this sector and this space.  I want to thank you, Robin, so much for your time, and for sharing your lessons learned  so far.  And obviously, you'll be learning a lot more over the next months and years.  
**[0:56:31-0:56:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:56:31):**  And thank you guys so much for this conversation.  It's clearly just so critical.  And I think for anyone listening, the takeaway is, if you don't know your farmers, get to  know them.  And it doesn't matter what industry you're in, because your employees are completely  
**[0:56:47-0:56:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:56:47):**  dependent on food.  So the more that we can elevate farmer status in our society, politically, you know, in  the United States, I think we only have something like two farmers that are members of Congress.  And again, for such a critically important part of society, there needs to be more representation  at the table at every table.  
**[0:57:06-0:57:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:57:06):**  Absolutely.  That was the, you started this podcast so nicely with such beautiful words, and you  ended it with the best way you could possibly do.  So thank you so much.  It was such a pleasure having the chance to talk to you.  
**[0:57:17-0:57:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:57:17):**  And thank you for your time.  It was amazing to have your opinion on this.  Thanks so much, you guys.  Thank you for listening to this episode, which is part of the Transition Finance series,  trying to find appropriate transition finance to speed up regenerative agriculture on farms.  
**[0:57:33-0:57:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:57:33):**  For feedback, ideas, suggestions, please contact us through Twitter or via the contact page  on the website investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.  Please share this episode with a friend and give us a five star rating, which really helps  others to find the podcast.  All the episodes of the series can be found on the website and in your podcast app.  
**[0:57:52-0:58:02](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:57:52):**  Thank you and see you next time.  Dear friends of the podcast, I'm super excited to share with you the online video course  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, how to put money to work in regenerating  soils at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  Why are we doing this course?  
**[0:58:17-0:58:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:58:17):**  After 100 interviews and more than 100 hours of audio asking the question how to put money  to work in regenerating soils, and have been following the space since 2011 and recording  this podcast since 2016, we thought it was time to share our lessons learned.  What have we seen in the space over the last years?  How have we built our decision making framework, what to focus on with the podcast, how have  
**[0:58:38-0:58:43](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:58:38):**  we picked interviewees, what questions should you ask, what is happening in the space, what  should you read, what should you listen, what should you watch, how to approach this space.  For whom is this course?  You, the soil builders and investors in the space.  The soil builders, people working in this space, entrepreneurial farmers, fund managers,  
**[0:58:58-0:59:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:58:58):**  vehicle builders, crowd investing, platform builders, ag tech companies, farm to gut food  companies, permaculture, key line designers, holistic management, consultants, etc.  People that are building soil at scale.  And the investors who are putting their own money to work through their family office  or as private individuals or people who are putting other people's money to work through  
**[0:59:18-0:59:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:59:18):**  foundations, institutional capital, banks, insurance companies, etc.  Is this course free?  No.  This is pay what you think it's worth.  Meaning I have no way of knowing what this course will be worth to you.  
**[0:59:31-0:59:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:59:31):**  And I'm very aware that among the listeners of this podcast, we have people with very  different means.  So I'm inviting you, if this course is creating value to you, and if you have the means to  consider paying what you think it's worth.  Thank you.  
**[0:59:46-0:59:47](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=0:59:46):**  So what is this course?  It's currently a series of 17 videos, mostly ranging from 10 to 15 minutes plus PDF slides  so you don't have to write along.  We're going to look into why invest in regenerative agriculture and why extractive agriculture  is so risky, how to invest, what kind of frameworks you could and I think should build, what to  
**[1:00:06-1:00:10](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=1:00:06):**  invest in, what kind of co-investors you could find, or what kind of investors you could  find if you're a soil builder.  Every lesson will have a digging deeper part where I will share what kind of reports, what  kind of interviews, what kind of videos you can look into if you want to dig deeper.  We're going to look at nutrient density, landscape design, and a lot more.  
**[1:00:26-1:00:27](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=1:00:26):**  So what is it not?  It's not a list of investable deals.  Unfortunately, that doesn't exist in this world.  We're really at the beginning of the regenerative agriculture and food revolution.  It's also not investment advice.  
**[1:00:37-1:00:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/2020/04/28/transition-finance-ep4/#t=1:00:37):**  Before making any investment, please find professional investment advice.  So get ready, get a cup of coffee, a cup of tea, or whatever you're drinking.  Click on the link below, sign up, and I'm really looking forward to your feedback.  