---
title: What we learned in 2021 about tech, farmers, scale and love for nature
---
### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-12-28)  
### Author(s): Koen van Seijen  

**[0:00:00-0:00:06](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:00:00):**  What did we learn in 2021 about tech, farmers, scale, and love for nature?  Wow, another crazy 12 months have absolutely flown by and we ended the 2020, so a year ago, with these words.  We hope that 2021 will be a boring, as in, an uneventful year, where we start to focus on the growth of the regenerative agriculture sector  
**[0:00:22-0:00:28](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:00:22):**  and start to build the key pieces for the rest of this decade to capture this momentum. End quote.  We were definitely wrong and right at the same time, because it was not boring at all, unfortunately.  We're still in many places, I would argue most places, in a deep health crisis.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:45](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:00:38):**  But at the same time, lots of interesting things started to move towards building the foundational blocks for this regenerative momentum.  So the thing that gives us most hope in these crazy times is definitely you.  The wave of talent with a ton of experience in other sectors is getting interested in the food and agriculture space.  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:00:55):**  You're building farms, funds, vehicles, technology, all to regenerate soils at scale.  Is it enough? Does it go deep enough? Are we asking all the hard questions about our relationship with and in nature?  See, for example, the great article of The Counter, the regenerative agriculture movement needs a reckoning.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:16](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:01:12):**  For sure not. Can we afford not to try? Absolutely not.  So let's get a cup of tea and dive in what we learned this year.  A lab. Where would you put your money? Nature slash soil or in a lab?  
**[0:01:24-0:01:31](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:01:24):**  Chef Dembarba was very clear. Great flavor, health benefits, healthy ecosystems can only come from healthy soils, not a lab.  End quote. So do you agree? Or do you have a different opinion? Let us know in the comments below.  Energy and love for nature. Satish, if I had only 25% of the energy that Satish had as he is 85 years old, I would sign for it absolutely now.  
**[0:01:49-0:01:52](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:01:49):**  Wow, what a hero and what a great person.  And Laura, Laura Ortiz, who asked some very, very deep questions about how do we make investors fall in love with nature and fall in love with biodiversity?  Diving deeper. We really enjoyed the chance to dive deeper into New Foundation Farms, a super ambitious farm to fork table project in the UK.  
**[0:02:08-0:02:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:02:08):**  Definitely check out the series if you haven't done yet.  They're trying to raise 20 million to buy a thousand acre farm.  And I really enjoyed unpacking the financing and the governance with Paul and the storytelling with Kirsti and the tech with Wayne.  
**[0:02:21-0:02:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:02:21):**  And of course, the overall goal and mission with Mark and what a regenerative business actually is with Marcus.  That was definitely a deep interview, which I loved. If you haven't listened to it, definitely check it out.  More of these kind of series where we're unpacking, let's say the teams, the people that are building really these building blocks will follow in 2022.  
**[0:02:42-0:02:44](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:02:42):**  So stay tuned. The Landscape Tech series.  So Eric Smith of the Grantham Foundation joined us to talk about neglected climate opportunities.  And one of the big ones is definitely how do we scale Regena Act to a landscape scale?  
**[0:02:53-0:03:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:02:53):**  And how do we get all these benefits of bringing back rivers, of mitigating local climate change, of growing a lot of healthy, nutrient dense food, etc, etc.  Getting more money into the pockets of farmers. How do we get that to a landscape scale?  We were lucky enough to get support from the Grantham Foundation, from the Grantham Environment Trust, I should say, to run a series on that topic.  
**[0:03:15-0:03:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:03:15):**  We're not done yet, but we have recorded and published some great episodes so far.  We've looked at satellites with Anastasia. We looked at how to apply key line design on 10,000.  Yes, that's a one with four zeros. Hectares with Jason. And how to calculate returns on a landscape scale with Jasper of Common Land.  
**[0:03:35-0:03:40](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:03:35):**  And of course, how to collect and sell data, environmental data with Natalie and Mike.  You can discover all the episodes and the ones that are still coming because maybe when you're listening to this, they are already out on the Landscape Tech Series website.  Just follow the link below in the show notes. Scale and ambition.  
**[0:03:53-0:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:03:53):**  How can we deliver the great promises of regeneration, stabilize climates, bring back rivers, clean up oceans, etc.  Please let us let me dream for a minute here. We had some very ambitious interviews, one definitely with Walter Yenne about the water cycles and why we should focus on that.  Why we should focus on water and not so much on carbon. And one with Maddie Ackermans, who challenged us to think truly big.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:24](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:04:16):**  They're working on a system, on a project, on an approach that could influence literally the climate of the Mediterranean and the Middle East.  Talking about scale. Money, money, money. We met some very interesting new money managers this year.  Trailhead Capital, who is hunting for unicorns, joined us twice on the podcast and Regen Ventures with Dan joined us to talk about how to apply the principles of regenerative agriculture to technology.  
**[0:04:42-0:04:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:04:42):**  And we met Clemence who has for the first time, actually, thanks to an introduction of Lenny, who has invested over the last years 80 million, that's eight zero, into vertically integrated agroforestry companies in Latin America and sub-Saharan Africa.  And who hinted towards, let's say, a new structure he is building for the future. But more on that later. He will definitely come back to talk about that.  And we also checked in with some friends. Paul McMahon, who was one of the first guests we ever interviewed five years ago.  
**[0:05:11-0:05:19](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:05:11):**  And we had a lot of fun looking back and unpacking their new 250 million silver European agroforestry fund.  Things have changed a lot, mostly on the invest store side, we discussed with Paul, because on the investment side, interesting things have always been there.  And we're very much looking forward to meeting many more conscious money managers in 2022.  
**[0:05:33-0:05:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:05:33):**  Beyond the farm gate, we spend a lot of time talking about the farmers, we have to help them, we have to partner with them, changing practices to build more soil, etc, etc.  But what happens beyond the farm gate? How do we get all of these amazing products, ingredients to our kitchen tables? And very importantly, more money back to the farmer or the land steward?  How do we communicate the immense challenges and immense potential and the endless mysteries, obviously, of soil?  
**[0:05:59-0:06:09](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:05:59):**  Definitely a shout out to Paul Lightfoot and his great Negative Foods newsletter. I've learned a lot over the last years and I'm looking forward to welcoming him on the podcast soon.  We were lucky enough to unpack many of these in a number of interviews, for example, with Tobias Jost, who is buying a full rotation from farmers or buying everything a complex agroforestry system can produce and selling it to end consumers.  Or how to create a market for region meat through hybrid meats. And that simply being a vegan cheese company isn't good enough. Surprise, surprise.  
**[0:06:31-0:06:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:06:31):**  Thank you so much, Brad, for coming on the podcast and for your openness and vulnerability.  And surprisingly, for such a large corporate, a very open conversation with Benjamin about the work Nestle is doing and the role and challenges in this regenerative transition.  This has been supported by the Earthworm Foundation. So definitely check out the interview we did with Bastiaan of the Earthworm Foundation as well.  
**[0:06:55-0:07:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:06:55):**  Teikla and Gijs came back on the podcast to talk about the good, the bad and the ugly. Spoiler alert, it's incredibly hard to do region ag the right way. And to talk about their new launched marketplace, which sells ingredients with great regenerative stories and funnels much more money back to the farmers and to the land.  And we got the great honor to and pleasure to visit and interview one of the leading farms in Europe, more than 2000 hectares in Tuscany, Italy alone. Farm biodynamically, wine grapes, olives, cheese, grain, nuts and so much more.  All and I repeat all sold directly to the end consumer. No middleman, no shops, no wholesaler and for very honest prices.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:42](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:07:36):**  This is a proof that you can build a vertically integrated angry food business without becoming elitist.  And then probably the most important piece farmers, where would we be without farmers? Luckily, also this year we managed to have a few farmers still not enough on the podcast.  And we had a great conversation with Dimitri and Matteo on a farm recorded actually with John about the role of pigs in regeneration.  
**[0:07:58-0:08:04](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:07:58):**  We learned from one of the leading farmers in the Netherlands, Melanie Klompe, why she is going all in on nutrient density.  And as I mentioned already before, there are some some great updates of friends that came back on the show, not only Paul McMahon, Teiklaan Gijs, et cetera, and Matteo, but also Brendan and Phil of the Perennial Fund and Mad Agriculture, which shared an update and Iagronom on their soil carbon work.  And of course, good friend of the show and a good friend, Judith De Swartz on her latest book and then Kittredge on his work around nutrient density and the latest research there.  
**[0:08:30-0:08:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:08:30):**  Five years, we're approaching the end of 2021 and we had over 165,000 streams and more than 40 interviews.  We started cooperating with a scribing artist, Irena, who is bringing the interviews to life in short videos you can find on YouTube.  And as I'm recording this exactly five years ago, almost to the day we uploaded our first few episodes of the podcast.  
**[0:08:51-0:08:57](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:08:51):**  I could have never imagined what the podcast would have turned into. And this were only the first five years.  So imagine what the next five will bring. So thank you all, all for listening, for joining, for taking time out of your busy days to come online and answer my sometimes silly questions.  And thank you obviously all for sharing, for taking time out of your busy days to listen to this.  
**[0:09:12-0:09:20](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/what-we-learned-in-2021#t=0:09:12):**  And a special thanks for all of you that have been paying for the video course, have been financially supporting us, have been paying what you think is worth.  You really make this work possible.  So let's get back to work to really make a difference over the next five years. And thank you so much for listening. See you in the new year.  