### Investing in Regenerative Agriculture and Food  (2021-00-03)
**[0:00:00-0:00:03](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:00:00):**  Up next is an audio extract of one of the lessons of our video course,  investing in regenerative agriculture and food, specifically on what is regenerative agriculture.  Probably the question I get the most after can we actually make returns while investing in  regenerative food, which is for another lesson.  If you want to know more, find the link to the full video course in the description below,  
**[0:00:20-0:00:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:00:20):**  or go to investinginregenerativeagriculture.com.com.  Enjoy.  Welcome to the second lesson of the online course, investing in regenerative  agriculture and food, how to put your money to work in regenerating soils and  ecosystems at scale and growing a lot of tasty food while doing it.  
**[0:00:38-0:00:41](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:00:38):**  Today, we look into what is regenerative agriculture.  Probably the question I get most when I'm talking to people, what is actually regenerative  agriculture and food?  Don't worry, we're going to not go too fast.  We're going to scratch the surface.  
**[0:00:52-0:00:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:00:52):**  I'm going to give you a few mental frameworks to think about this, and I hope this helps.  And then at the end, I will give you a number of articles to read, a number of websites, a  number of books to really dive deeper into this.  So I will put that all in the slides of this.  This presentation will turn into a slide and you can download it and find all the links  
**[0:01:13-0:01:14](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:01:13):**  also below.  First, a few housekeeping rules of housekeeping notes.  Why are we doing this course?  I've been following this space of regenerative agriculture and food since 2011, and I've been  recording a podcast on the same subject, so how to invest in regenerative agriculture  
**[0:01:32-0:01:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:01:32):**  since 2016.  And this got us to over 90 interviews with more than 100 hours of interviews where we  asked the experts in the field, the investors, the farmers, the scientists how to put money  to work and get it back.  And we decided it was time to start sharing what we've learned, sharing it with the soil  
**[0:01:51-0:01:56](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:01:51):**  builders in the field, the people that are building soil, the entrepreneurial farmers,  the ag tech companies, the fund managers, the investment vehicle builders, the farm  to gut food companies, everybody that's thinking and working beyond their own farm gate and  with more than their own money.  And to the investors, the people working in family offices that are investing their own  
**[0:02:13-0:02:18](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:02:13):**  money, people working in foundations, insurance companies, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.  We want to be the bridge between those two groups as the soil builders have to or should  learn, I think, more about finance and investors should learn a lot more about soil.  Is this course free?  No, we're using a system called Pay What You Think It's Worth, inspired by the gift  
**[0:02:35-0:02:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:02:35):**  economy of Charles Eisenstein and how Frederick Laloux, the writer of the book Reinventing  Organizations, is charging for his book.  You can pay the normal book price or you can pay what you think it's worth because he  reasoned and I think he's perfectly right.  He cannot know and I cannot know what this course, this content, these lessons are worth  
**[0:02:54-0:02:59](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:02:54):**  to you. So if you have the means, I invite you to think and if this course has created  or is created value for you to consider paying what you think it's worth.  You can find all the information and the links how to do that in the description below.  Just to give you an idea, if I would charge this to a financial institution or something  else from a distance, this course would probably cost around four hundred dollars.  
**[0:03:21-0:03:26](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:03:21):**  Very important, this is not financial advice, it's not investment advice, seek financial  advice before making any investment.  Now, let's get to the content of this lesson.  What is regenerative agriculture?  A lot of people ask me, can you give me a definition?  
**[0:03:37-0:03:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:03:37):**  What is it? What is it not?  And that's very, very difficult, but let's first look at a definition I found online.  Regenerative agriculture is a system of farming principles and practices that increases  biodiversity and riches soil, improves watersheds and enhances ecosystem services.  So if you look at this in short, if you had to really boil it down to the essence, regenerative  
**[0:03:58-0:04:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:03:58):**  agriculture is building soils.  That's it. That's the first question I was asked to farmers.  It's the first question asked to investors, to ag tech companies, to food companies like  are you directly or indirectly helping to build soil?  Because at the end of the day, it's nature building soils and we're helping it.  
**[0:04:14-0:04:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:04:14):**  We're managing, we're nudging, we're facilitating.  And now let's get to the problem of the definition.  As regenerative agriculture is not a thing, it's not a zero or one.  You cannot, you're either not regenerative or you are.  It's very difficult, probably nearly impossible or impossible to find a definition because  
**[0:04:32-0:04:36](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:04:32):**  the definition means it's very clear what is and what is not.  Like with certified organic, you're either certified or you're not.  It's much easier to, there's a whole description in the article of a friend of mine, Ethan  Soloviev, that I've used a lot for this lesson that I will link below, why a definition doesn't  make sense in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:04:52-0:04:58](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:04:52):**  It's much more helpful to look at it from a continuum perspective.  On one side, it's very degenerative, extractive.  And slowly, if you move more, in this case to the green, you're going to see that it's  slowly, if you move more in this case to the green side, it's getting more regenerative.  Ethan did a great job, does a great job in his article to look at the different parts  
**[0:05:17-0:05:23](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:05:17):**  of the agriculture system and shows how they can be degenerative or regenerative.  So we'll have a look at it.  The next slide is very, very full.  I know that and I will go into a few more details, but I invite you definitely after  this lesson to have a look at the article and let me know what you think and let Ethan  
**[0:05:34-0:05:35](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:05:34):**  know what you think.  So here you see the different parts of agriculture from the characteristics, the inputs  and the practices, and they can all range from very degenerative on the left to very  regenerative, the green side.  So let's have a look at the three parts.  
**[0:05:50-0:05:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:05:50):**  First up, the characteristics, looking at economic sustainability, it's very clear that  and one of the reasons we're recording the podcast that regenerative agriculture can  be profitable, can be investable and can generate not only all the nice other impacts  we want to have, but also a financial return.  Then it looks at diversity, resilience, crops and products.  
**[0:06:12-0:06:17](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:06:12):**  And it's clear that in all agriculture systems or many agriculture systems, you can be  either you can be very degenerative, but you can also be very regenerative.  Then look at inputs where, for example, does where does the input that a farm uses come  from, is it international, national, regional, local or on the farm?  Where does the fertility come from?  
**[0:06:33-0:06:39](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:06:33):**  And here we can already see some of the confusion that starts with organic certified  organic could use a lot of manure or from plants could use manure that comes  internationally, for instance.  So it could be partly it could be perfectly certified organic, but absolutely not  regenerative could be plowing, which is something we'll see in the next slide.  
**[0:06:54-0:07:00](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:06:54):**  So it really is important to take a holistic view of all the inputs, the practices and  the characteristics of a farm to see how far along they are in on the regenerative  journey.  They will never be done.  If you talk to very experienced regenerative farmers, they will tell you that they're  
**[0:07:10-0:07:11](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:07:10):**  never done.  They discover every year that they can go more complex.  They can go more chaotic.  They can go deeper and deeper and deeper.  And these are the practices I mentioned.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:21](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:07:20):**  In this case, let's look at tillage.  You're very high tillage is very difficult to be regenerative.  If you're low tillage, you could be depending on the systems you use, disease  management.  If you're spraying a lot of chemical pesticides, very difficult to be regenerative.  
**[0:07:32-0:07:37](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:07:32):**  If you're using biological pesticides, you're on your way, but nobody would argue  that you're fully regenerative or you are very much advanced.  If you're using an ecosystem approach, you're on your way to being regenerative.  Or you are very much advanced if you're using an ecosystem approach, you're getting  there.  
**[0:07:50-0:07:55](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:07:50):**  And if you look at guiding frameworks, obviously, you can look at carbon farming,  agroforestry, organic, diversified.  I mean, there's so many different parts, but I think this continuum really helps you.  And I would really, I've seen somebody actually using this and who sent it to an  agriculture company that he was interested in investing and asked the company to rate  
**[0:08:12-0:08:13](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:08:12):**  themselves.  So where are they on these lines, which I think is a great way to use this tool.  And I would invite you, obviously, credit Ethan for creating this and let him know  because he's always happy to hear.  And then just to finish off the whole definition versus what is regenerative  
**[0:08:30-0:08:32](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:08:30):**  agriculture discussion, Daniel made a very nice comment once.  And he said, we're organic really prouder itself on we are free of, we are free of  chemical inputs.  We are free of chemical fertilizer, et cetera, et cetera.  In regenerative agriculture, we're all in all the nutrients, all the fertilization,  
**[0:08:48-0:08:49](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:08:48):**  et cetera, et cetera.  So I hope this helps.  If you want to dig deeper, read the article, Ethan, obviously.  If you want to dig very deep and go to the No Regrets initiative, which is an initiative  of Sally Calhoun and Esther Park, who we've had on the podcast a number of times.  
**[0:09:04-0:09:07](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:09:04):**  They created an amazing website full of resources.  You can just scratch your surface there or you can go really deep in soil health in a  philosophy of regeneration, regeneration, business models, et cetera, et cetera.  You can really lose a few weeks here, I think, in terms of in terms of reading and  follow up, but it's absolutely amazing.  
**[0:09:21-0:09:22](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:09:21):**  You want to read some books?  I always recommend Growing a Revolution, David Montgomery, who was on the show.  You can find his interview here or and actually because both of them are great.  Kiss the ground, the book.  Also follow the community, but definitely also read the book.  
**[0:09:36-0:09:38](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:09:36):**  And most importantly, honestly, visit the farm.  Go and visit local farmers that are building soil.  How do you find out?  Ask the question, are you building soil?  And if they completely lit up and start sharing about the cover crops they use, a  
**[0:09:49-0:09:54](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:09:49):**  rotation, et cetera, et cetera, you have a very interesting conversation, I think.  So ask them and the team about their management, the soils and ask questions and listen.  There's no better way to learn more about regenerative agriculture than to listen.  So thank you for joining this lesson on what is regenerative agriculture.  I really invite your feedback.  
**[0:10:09-0:10:12](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:10:09):**  Yes, please send it through the notes below the comments below.  Find me on Twitter, LinkedIn, et cetera.  And find out more on our website, investinginregenativeagriculture.com.  And don't forget to think about pay what you think this is worth.  On the next episode, we look at why investing in regenerative agriculture.  
**[0:10:27-0:10:33](https://investinginregenerativeagriculture.com/course/#t=0:10:27):**  Thank you very much and see you at the next one.  