---
title: A Discussion About How Millets Can Help With Water Conservation With John Manuel Of Dryland Genetics
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-07-14)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & John Manuel  

**[0:00:00-0:00:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast where we  will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food. I am your  host Joni Kinwall Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of  Snacktivist Foods. Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories,  and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement. Food is  
**[0:00:27-0:00:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:00:27):**  the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate  change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable, regenerative  agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can  create a more resilient system. Awesome. Well hey everybody. Thank you so much for  
**[0:00:55-0:01:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:00:55):**  joining us on Regenerative by Design. I'm Joni, your host, and today we have Jon  Manuel joining us from Dryland Genetics. So welcome Jon. Welcome. Thanks for  having me Joni. Yeah I'm super stoked that we could make this happen. You have a  really interesting background and working on some super cool projects. So I  just am thrilled that we can tell the world a little bit about what you're  
**[0:01:20-0:01:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:01:20):**  doing right now in the world of millet and dryland agriculture and drought  resistant agriculture and it's really important stuff that most people don't  know a lot about so this is going to be a fantastic episode. And where are you  calling in from today Jon? I'm in Brooklyn Park, Minnesota just north of  Minneapolis. Okay all right. Well very cool. So you do have a really interesting  
**[0:01:43-0:01:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:01:43):**  background from a commodities perspective. I was wondering if we could  start out today and have you just let the audience know a little bit about  your background. I mean you've worked for the big guys like General Mills and the  mid-sized guys like Miller Milling which they're a fantastic organization and  and they're also one that a lot of people don't know about because they're  
**[0:02:03-0:02:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:02:03):**  in that middle world of how their flour gets to their ramen for instance and  those kind of things. So if you just take a few minutes and let us know a little  bit about your background. Where did you grow up? Where did you go to school and  how did you end up in commodities and grains? Yeah I grew up not far from where  I'm at today. I grew up in an area called Ramsey, Minnesota which is you know today  
**[0:02:24-0:02:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:02:24):**  sort of known as an exurb of Minneapolis but when I was a kid it was  further into the country. So really you know kind of always grew up  straddling that line between urban and rural and it's kind of that you know an  interesting sort of foray into my career and why I do what I do and why I  love what I do. You know my father was involved in agriculture as a cash  
**[0:02:47-0:02:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:02:47):**  grain broker. In and around the business side of agriculture but not farming  myself. But you know growing up as a kid hearing about that I always thought you  know that that sounds boring so I thought it was the last thing I was  gonna get get into. Famous last words right? Yeah I went to college for  advertising and public relations actually. You know I was really excited  
**[0:03:15-0:03:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:03:15):**  to get into that world until I get out of college and realize just how many  other people want to be in that world and sort of tripped into agriculture a  little bit where I joined it was actually my father's business partner  had a business as an agricultural freight broker. You know sort of traded  me secondary market of all the hopper cars that green elevators used to to  
**[0:03:36-0:03:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:03:36):**  shift green around. And so I joined to help out for a short amount of time and  and that's really when I fell in love with the world of agriculture. Just  learning how that system works yourself when you don't have that visibility of  it was was really really mind expanding for me and interesting and I  essentially never left. I started there and formed a lot of great relationships  
**[0:03:59-0:04:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:03:59):**  with lots of people a broad network of everybody who's touching rail cars when  you think about it from a commodity standpoint it is really big so it helped  me build a really good network and one of my biggest customers at the times  was General Mills which developed a relationship there so when an  opportunity came to jump and go to a company like that I leaped at it and it  
**[0:04:19-0:04:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:04:19):**  went there and I wanted to learn not to just be a middleman in the brokerage  world but enjoy you know what it's like being a principal working for a big  company like that and and really kind of got thrown into the deep end of the pool  of you know trading and sourcing wheat for the power mills and then yeah for a  big company Wow I mean yeah about talk about macro scale yeah I went from a  
**[0:04:42-0:04:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:04:42):**  three-person company to a thirty five thousand person company so it was a big  it was a big shift for sure and they're you know more closer to where you're at  today I was merchandising commodities out of that grain elevators in Idaho at  the time which have since changed hands a few times but there I really learned a  lot about all that goes into irrigated agriculture you know what what happens  
**[0:05:06-0:05:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:05:06):**  my main experience was trading with sort of commodities giants on the plans so to  deal with what's going on in in Idaho and California and places like that  where I was purchasing wheat for a flour mill was really another wake-up call of  everything that leads me to where I'm at today of you know how we grow food in a  lot of you know desert areas or desertification areas really across North  
**[0:05:30-0:05:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:05:30):**  America and and how that does affect the food system and everything it takes to  get the food that we that we want to grow that it gets to the massive  population centers like Los Angeles and out on the East Coast.  That's cool it really is a big puzzle and I love that you have spent your life  in what I call the the sexy middle because it's almost tongue-in-cheek  
**[0:05:52-0:05:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:05:52):**  because it's the it's the area that nobody knows about it's kind of a cult  it's kind of hidden away most people don't even think about it they think  about farms and then they think about the store but they don't ever really  think about everything that's in between which really is the most important when  you think about it so I call it the sexy middle because I really think we need  
**[0:06:10-0:06:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:06:10):**  people to really get involved and add a little more appeal to what happens there  and a lot more transparency which is going to be transformative to the food  system I think that's the next the next big thing that's going to happen as far  as consumer awareness so you have a very unique and very deep understanding of  how that whole world works. Yeah I think it's really interesting I like the way  
**[0:06:33-0:06:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:06:33):**  you refer to it too exciting you know people are becoming you know we've seen  a lot of consumers get much more interested in being closer to  understanding you know they want to be closer to the supply chain they want it  to come more direct but without really understanding how all that happens and  how that's going to happen. And how it affects cost. Yes actually it's gonna lead to  
**[0:06:53-0:06:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:06:53):**  really right you know today more than ever with with inflation going on like  in the flour milling world we've seen this coming for years with truck driver  shortages once that's doing to freight prices and now seeing it across a major  scale as you know factories have to pay more for workers you know really seeing  that supply chain get hit with all those small pieces of inflation that have been  
**[0:07:17-0:07:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:07:17):**  building for a long time you know it's really just done a ton to spike prices  now everybody's got it on the grocery bill and education and what it means  when that that sort of falls apart a little. Yeah you can remember you can't  hide when it starts affecting your everyday eating patterns in fact Ed and  I were just talking about that earlier this week talking about how I bet the  
**[0:07:39-0:07:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:07:39):**  instapot sales are going to spike again and things like that as people just  again like during COVID start thinking about cooking more from scratch and  buying things in more raw forms that require some of that value-added  processing aka cooking you know and preparing to be happening at home again.  Yeah I think it's you know definitely you know stress makes change as  
**[0:08:03-0:08:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:08:03):**  always as in any system and oh yeah you've obviously got a lot of that going  on in the world right now with you know what's what's happening with climate  leading into it then happening with you know what we're seeing from COVID  pandemics perspective and how that's changed how the consumer shops and how  the consumer prepares and ultimately how they buy which is affecting what the  
**[0:08:24-0:08:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:08:24):**  companies make and you're seeing all these shifts and pivots and I think you  know so much of the supply chain you know shakiness right now is coming out  of that any changing system you're gonna have all sorts of stress and then you  throw labor shortage on top of that and just compounds all the problems. Sure does  interesting so how did you get from General Mills which is like the big of  
**[0:08:45-0:08:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:08:45):**  the big to Miller Milling which is a really exceptional company I know a lot  of people who have worked for Miller Milling and always really impressed by  the people who work there tell us a little bit about that. Yeah it was a  really unique opportunity that kind of happened by chance but you know back to  that stress makes change things statements I think it was you know right  
**[0:09:05-0:09:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:09:05):**  around 2012-2013 the Canadian wheat board went away and that was you know  essentially a government-run single buying desk or for managing the trade of  wheat in Canada so when that was going away a major Durham Miller like Miller  Milling was concerned you know they've been buying from one entity now they  have to deal with all these independent grain companies that they didn't have  
**[0:09:28-0:09:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:09:28):**  contact I had relationships there from my rail job and and also in helping with  what my father had done started being a middleman to the oats world so I had  lots of deep connections at those Canadian grain companies and that really  you know sort of gave me the background and then also dealing with California  agriculture you know Miller Milling had a Durham mill in California and a Durham  
**[0:09:51-0:09:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:09:51):**  mill in Virginia but they were buying predominantly from the Central Valley in  California and predominantly from Canada so I just had a weird sort of unique  sort of by happenstance skill set that really fit their needs and you know they  were a they're a smaller responsive company who knew what they needed and so  a few months of conversation and my time at General Mills was much shorter than I  
**[0:10:13-0:10:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:10:13):**  planned I was there for just a little over two years and then made the jump to  Miller Milling just because it was a great opportunity and what I was really  interested in was also their parent company ignition siphon group was was  very interested in growth within the flour milling world and that was rare in  these times where you know flour milling business is an older model that's seen  
**[0:10:33-0:10:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:10:33):**  as a cash cow by a lot of companies and they were really willing to come in and  invest and grow and that that attracted that made the people. Oh cool what what  were some of the highlights of your time working there like what kind of things  were eye-opening to you working on that level and that tier of the the path to  market world from the farm to the table so to speak? Yeah it was a much different  
**[0:10:56-0:11:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:10:56):**  model than what was happening in my previous employer where it was you know  branded products that were high value a lot of focus on smaller packaging and  distributor market whereas at Miller I really got exposure to the big bulk  world of how you know grain car you know rail cars full of flour are shipped and  what kind of plants are going into how cost competitive that commoditized world  
**[0:11:19-0:11:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:11:19):**  can be and then you know really learning and growing through my career there had  the opportunity to go through a you know large-scale acquisition as the flour  industry changed and some two giants merged we were able to buy part of the  mills that that the Department of Justice wouldn't let them keep. So got  you know just a broad exposure of business there and a broad exposure  
**[0:11:41-0:11:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:11:41):**  across the food world and what it all takes to make it happen and then was  able to grow in my career and jump into sales and really learn the hurdles of  you know what you have to go through to get products approved at a company and  all that. Fantastic background so I have gotten introduced to you through your  work at Dryland Genetics and a shared passion for millet which millet is a  
**[0:12:02-0:12:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:12:02):**  grain in the commodity world that most people have probably not heard of and  except maybe in the context of like bird feed or you know things like that maybe  if they buy Dave's killer bread or like a super seed health bread they see it  in their sandwich loaf they're like oh what is that little thing is it a seed  is it a grain what is it and you know but millet really is a high potential  
**[0:12:24-0:12:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:12:24):**  crop for so many reasons so what led you to join the team at Dryland Genetics?  Yeah so you know similar to most Americans I think I didn't know a heck  of a lot about millet even working in agriculture other than you know new is  kind of growing out in the Dakotas in Colorado Nebraska and feed it as bird  seed but I was also very aware of what was going on with you know everything  
**[0:12:47-0:12:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:12:47):**  going on with with climate and in the food world seeing large corporate  companies make sustainability claims you know really intending to do the right  thing but also being that you know the claims were coming before the solutions  were there to be provided and so right yeah that's definitely happening a lot  yeah so really went through a lot of work even at miler trying to figure out  
**[0:13:08-0:13:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:13:08):**  you know what's the right solution to help these customers you know meet these  claims that they need and like getting exposed to lots of things and at the end  of the day you know looked and felt a lot like greenwashing it's you know  certification of processes rather than any sort of tangible change that we  could really take and go go sell or do or bring to a customer as a solution  
**[0:13:28-0:13:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:13:28):**  yeah the thing that got me most excited was when I first got introduced to  Dryland Genetics and what they were doing it was really you know kind of  more on the on the research scale they had done you know years worth of good  breeding techniques to really focus on improvement in millet to make it more  agronomically viable because of the plant is so efficient they knew it could  
**[0:13:49-0:13:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:13:49):**  be a great tool to help you know save water use especially in high plains  areas especially in areas where aquifers are being drained too quickly due to  irrigation so going and learning about it and learning about what all millet  can do and just how efficient that plant is and understanding you know that it's  eaten in other parts of the world as regular parts of the diet it just seemed  
**[0:14:11-0:14:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:14:11):**  like such a simple tangible solution to me I saw you know an amazing solution to  it to a problem that's more now than ever versus something we have to worry  about in the future and water right I thought it just seemed like an extremely  interesting product project you know I considered it for a while and I found  myself not being able to stop thinking about it and the ability to do what I do  
**[0:14:34-0:14:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:14:34):**  and trying to do good in the world was was really a driving focus for me  moving to a much smaller company really cool so yeah I mean for the listeners  who are on the show today you know we'll take a deeper dive into millet and a  little bit about it and we're going to actually you know have several podcasts  that are dedicated to millets as a general food group but in this  
**[0:14:57-0:15:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:14:57):**  conversation today we're really going to be focused on the type of millet that's  referred to as prosomillet and that's the one that's widely grown in North  America and harvested there are other types of millets it's kind of one of  those misnomer names that applies to about eight different plant species all  called millet even though they're really not totally related I mean they're  
**[0:15:20-0:15:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:15:20):**  related but they're like cousins so it's a fascinating thing and but prosomillet  just on its own it has tremendous agricultural agronomic value and when I  look at it from the perspective of a food brand that's really dedicated to  making great tasting foods that are inclusive to people with allergies high  nutritional density nutritional value and have a significant climate impact  
**[0:15:45-0:15:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:15:45):**  millet is top of the list as far as things that we need to scramble to put  into foods for humans but we're up against this barrier of getting people  to understand that millet really isn't just for people who have a gluten  allergy or a gluten intolerance or celiac it's actually a food that has  value that makes it significant to everybody who eats every day so I'd love  
**[0:16:09-0:16:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:16:09):**  you to just take a moment and talk about millet from a from a business case  perspective yeah absolutely I think that's one of the most exciting things  to me first and foremost I like to start you know as far back to the beginning as  you can and which you know there's there's lots of new evidence you can  read and find articles about it but that that millet is essentially the one of  
**[0:16:28-0:16:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:16:28):**  the first grains you know really domesticated by humans even at the same  time or possibly before you know barley and wheat were especially in African  cultures and in Asian cultures it's still a large part of the diet today  again there's different you can get into that later but yeah it's like a whole  another topic but you know it's funny with this whole Neolithic founder group  
**[0:16:53-0:16:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:16:53):**  of crops that they've really studied to say the birth of agriculture with these  crops but a lot of that is through the lens of like the birth of agriculture  only happened in the Fertile Crescent where when you do look at the actual  archaeological record I know some agronomists that have even found some  pretty good evidence indicating that Neanderthals were cultivating millets  
**[0:17:14-0:17:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:17:14):**  throughout Asia way before the time of the actual agricultural revolution as we  know it along the Tigris and Euphrates which really brings in a whole other  narrative around food and sustainability and resiliency when we go back to these  early crops that really pioneered humanity as we know it so sorry just a  little sidestep nerd time there I'm known to digress myself so feel free to  
**[0:17:40-0:17:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:17:40):**  redirect me yeah no problem but that's that's all this is just to say that you  know humans have been eating millet forever you know we've been meeting that  so no one should be scared of eating millet obviously humans haven't been you  know from a you know basic you know protein starch carbohydrates it's it's  very similar to all sorts of other grains you know when you think of rice  
**[0:18:04-0:18:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:18:04):**  we born it has all the same you know there's there's nothing missing nothing  left out really in militant and in many cases as I'm sure maybe you'll touch on  a little bit more and I think you focused on it a lot of your work other  benefits that it might bring as well you know and it was widely consumed in  Europe before the Colombian era when corn kind of came in and dethroned it  
**[0:18:25-0:18:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:18:25):**  essentially because it was like this new crop and really exciting and you know  but when you do look at the skeletal records of Europeans there's a lot of  evidence that they were eating a ton of C4 plants before corn showed up which  does is very indicative of the role of millets in the European diet for many  many many centuries yeah absolutely it's you know and then you know to shift  
**[0:18:45-0:18:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:18:45):**  ahead and look at it in today's future of okay we've got you know this big  overall problem of we're gonna have you know billions and billions of people to  feed and that train doesn't seem to be slowing down anytime soon and we need to  find a way to do it without a way that's gonna strip strip the planet dry of  nutrients correct why not use the most efficient grain stock that we know of on  
**[0:19:11-0:19:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:19:11):**  the planet today and not it uses less of everything it's an extremely  efficient plant and the one issue here to focus on in North America you know  for to choose one that that millet can take priority on it's it's really water  conservation right and that's you know yeah which is such a big deal in the  West I mean I think people out east forget about what a big deal it is for  
**[0:19:34-0:19:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:19:34):**  us out here where water is now the limiting region it truly is you know so  much of the farmland even if it does have historical irrigation as we see  with Sigma and the Colorado River a lot of that agriculture is going to radically  change in the next few years because of limited access to irrigation that's where  things like millet really play a huge role yeah I think even in those areas  
**[0:19:59-0:20:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:19:59):**  where you know stuff will need irrigation you know can you irrigate  less and I think millet will have a huge role you know as we just have fewer  fewer drops of water to put on plants we need to make sure we're consuming the  ones that use a lot less of it right and we've all brought through you know the  steps and paces you see going on in California you know don't don't water  
**[0:20:22-0:20:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:20:22):**  your lawn everything we grew up with but turn the water off when you're brushing  your teeth that those sort of water conservation efforts but to put that into  perspective this is you know to use if the Kansas Department of Agriculture's  resources so ninety four point five percent of aquifer water use in Kansas  goes to agriculture so like the simple thing you can do if you care about  
**[0:20:47-0:20:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:20:47):**  saving water is eat something that consumes less of it it's gonna say wow  water then turning off your faucet putting the low flow showers and you  know you know everyone really gravitates to that and that's really important but  it's like we ignore this whole agricultural use case ninety four percent it's  really that high I hadn't heard that number that's black that's crazy yeah  
**[0:21:10-0:21:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:21:10):**  that's the state of Kansas so and they're in a really sensitive aquifer  area when you look at like long-term planning for agriculture wow it's um  that's startling I didn't realize it was that high yeah you know like I said it's  you know lots of things in you know the conservation space are always viewed as  a lens of what do we do for 50 years down the road and I think we're in the  
**[0:21:36-0:21:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:21:36):**  space right now we know the Ogallala reservoir the giant underwater lake that  feeds that big Midwest bread bowl that's not important to just the United States  but the world is very quickly running out of water and yeah and it's 6,000  years to replenish it it's not a replenishing aquifer don't like if at  the very least we can do is they're eating stuff that'll at least slow the  
**[0:21:59-0:22:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:21:59):**  disappearance of that water you know how I view and how we try land genetics view  you this is really you know we don't think that mill is the end-all be-all  answer for all of that regenerative agriculture needs but we really do think  that it is you know a great sort of first step in the in the journey of  10,000 miles you know you've got to take a good step and and I'm a big  
**[0:22:26-0:22:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:22:26):**  believer in you know agriculture is it's so important to everything we do in  society that also is going to play one of the most important rules as a tool to  to fix some of our problem but if we're looking at as a tool we need to make  sure it's a tool that fits the hand of American agriculture in the stage today  and I think with what we're doing at dry land genetics is really aimed towards  
**[0:22:47-0:22:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:22:47):**  that you know we don't we don't we know that just creating one more big mono  crop is not the end-all be-alls of a solution but if we can just you know work on one  crop and show that we can grow it and show that we can you know start to bring  that biodiversity I think there's lots of other crops we can focus on in the  future and get right grow the right that's a great point yeah yeah that's a  
**[0:23:10-0:23:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:23:10):**  great point and I'm glad you mentioned the biodiversity piece because you know  I think a lot of times people do have that reductionistic lens where it's like  oh from one monocrop to the next and not really realizing that it's that richness  of biodiversity that's gonna drive resiliency in our farmlands moving  forward and and and having a toolkit for farmers to pull from where they can they  
**[0:23:31-0:23:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:23:31):**  can pivot and still grow food in response to the like week-to-week  changes of climate or environment or availability of fertilizer availability  of seed etc and like I just was talking to a farmer this morning and he was he's  in North Dakota and talking about how they haven't even really gotten the  tractors out because it's been waterlogged they were dry dry dry and  
**[0:23:53-0:24:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:23:53):**  then boom cold wet and he's like oh boy this is where I really hope I can find a  market for proso because we have a lot of areas that we just can't plant right  now and we're gonna miss that critical window for the early season but by the  time it dries out it'd be perfect because millet has such a short growing  season and that's another thing that is important for us to talk about is that  
**[0:24:15-0:24:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:24:15):**  short harvest window that you know for these farmers that are responding to  inclement weather he's like boy if I could just sneak some proso in there  boom I would get ROI off of that acreage we produce food I'd get profit and it's  gonna fit into this weird model of weather we have this year and that's one  thing to touch on you know what we do and how we do it a little bit you know  
**[0:24:37-0:24:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:24:37):**  everything we do is is non GMO we're not using genetic modification but we are  using modern science to to look at the traits and know you know try to know  what we're doing when we make crosses you know a really important thing that  we did is is all the you know proso hasn't had a ton of commercial  development and when I say a ton I mean like almost none in North America yeah  
**[0:24:59-0:25:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:24:59):**  so everything's come out of university programs and a lot of the varieties that  were out there you know were released back in like 1994 and when our head  reader Santos Rajput who's a genius along with along with both Schnabel's  the founders of the company know much more about plant science than I do I'll  do my best here but they they really know that the genetic diversity of the  
**[0:25:21-0:25:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:25:21):**  proso that was created here in the United States was was just really narrow  genetic diversity it was grabbing lines from where it was growing Nebraska  Colorado so we really brought in some you know really broad germplasm from  across the globe from Germany and Russia and Ukraine and China and really were  able to look at you know trying to trying to find those best traits that we  
**[0:25:45-0:25:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:25:45):**  can make a proso that can yield enough to really help be a tool for the farmer  and when I say that I mean you know they have to make money they're under enough  pressure today yeah I mean a lot of that is what perpetuates you know kind of  that monocropping system we see is is the commoditized nature of it so I think  you know making sure like I said that we're a tool that fits the hand of  
**[0:26:05-0:26:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:26:05):**  American agriculture we know it needs to help farmers and ranchers make money  while helping to preserve their soil and I really yeah that's scale yeah yeah at  scale and that's such an important thing because there's so much cool innovation  happening and micro farming level which is such a different economic model and  it's a great economic it's a great experimental ground but it's not it  
**[0:26:27-0:26:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:26:27):**  doesn't have the impact potential that these big at scale plays do and I think  it's so important to keep that in mind I mean I love the romantic notion of  small-scale AG but on an economic you know national global level it has some  significant challenges for profitability and farming's farmers aren't nonprofit  people I mean it's these are for-profit businesses and it's part of the the  
**[0:26:50-0:26:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:26:50):**  engine that cranks the wheel of the American you know economy and the  American dream so we have to always be really mindful of how to keep this to be  profitable and I in my mind it enhances profitability because you're giving  farmers more options to be creative and to try different avenues that will  enhance their economic model rather than being upholdent to the super narrow  
**[0:27:13-0:27:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:27:13):**  commodities market where they have very limited path to market and almost  function in a vacuum where they're not in a free market economic system system  it's like the government huge huge industry and that's it there's like no  choice no option and it's not doesn't really operate in a free market system  so I think what you guys are doing really helps push back on that yeah I  
**[0:27:32-0:27:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:27:32):**  think and I think there is you know those those dream end goals of what it  can be and then there's where we are today and I really do think of this as  as a simple step of you know making a march towards those goals if we can't  you know make one of the most efficient plants on the world and and make it a  larger scale ingredients across not only human consumption but how we feed  
**[0:27:54-0:27:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:27:54):**  animals and that's an important note I can jump into as well too yeah  water-saving some of the most easily you know marketable water savings are  going to be for people who feed animals versus just hmm yeah let's talk about  that because that's something that you can't talk about large-scale AG and  climate impact agriculture without talking about that because the  
**[0:28:18-0:28:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:28:18):**  statistics on how much of our grain and and impulse so soybean and and whatnot  included how much of that actually ends up in the bellies of animals is actually  really startling like from a statistic standpoint I think the average consumer  when they hear those numbers they're like wait a minute what like they don't  they don't realize how significant that is so if you could talk a little bit  
**[0:28:38-0:28:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:28:38):**  about that because biodiversity in our animal you know feed is is actually just  as important from a health perspective gut microbiomes perspective regenerative  AG overlay perspective so why don't you just riff on that a little bit yeah and  I'll keep it really really simple to some by no means an animal nutritionist  or anything too but I just think of you know we've seen certainly the poultry  
**[0:29:02-0:29:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:29:02):**  market as an area where a you can easily feed poultry to chickens today they've  got gizzard they can digest the hull doesn't need to be dealt you know right  it's in birdseed today so much easier yeah chickens with it is a very easy  move and if you think of an individual egg if if a large egg layer were to  replace their corn stock in their in their feed with proso millet and you  
**[0:29:28-0:29:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:29:28):**  think about how much less water gets used on the millet as compared to the  corn each individual egg would you know there's different ways you do the  calculation but our range we've come up with is around 12 to 18 gallons of water  per individual egg so you know Wow really yeah okay can you say that one  more time because I we need to write that down that's crazy yeah so the egg  
**[0:29:49-0:29:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:29:49):**  of a proso fed chicken will ultimately use about 12 to 18 gallons of per water  per egg less than a corn fed chicken holy smokes that is that's insane that's  a lot of water per egg not per dozen right right yeah per egg well you took a  company the siren you made you know and then similar math we've done on like a  four ounce pork chop on a proso fed pig it would be around 25 gallons of water  
**[0:30:18-0:30:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:30:18):**  per four ounces per four up for every four ounce pork chop so you're making  more excited me more excited about proso than I was before John this is really  cool because I just often don't go there on the animal side because our whole our  whole line is plant-based so we're you know the the grains going direct to the  human belly but when you do add that in especially right now with you know  
**[0:30:41-0:30:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:30:41):**  Americans eat a lot of meat and they eat a ton of eggs I'm allergic to eggs so I  never eat them but boy that's that's a different lens in which to view the role  of proso on a larger landscape of impact yes if you looked at like you know I  won't name names for everybody's sake but a large poultry producer in the US  or that that's making you know lots of chicken into food you know the largest  
**[0:31:05-0:31:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:31:05):**  one if they were to swap out all their corn feed for proso millet they'd save  essentially around 2% of the entire Missouri River flows worth of fresh  water every year so you can make Wow act so when I say you know you can save our  water by thinking about you know what you eat in the water it uses not only  applies like you said putting the grain in your belly but yeah are you eating a  
**[0:31:31-0:31:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:31:31):**  more sustainably fed you know sort of animal or the more of the model of with  you know it's not the cow but the how and and there's all I don't want to get  into that conversation because yeah common threads go off on those oh yeah  it's a whole nother topic and I mean of course like pasture raise is is the gold  standard but as we shift this massive industry that is animal based products I  
**[0:31:56-0:32:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:31:56):**  mean that's not gonna happen overnight we're not going to go from K foes to  pasture in like six months that that's gonna be a transitional period and if  something like proso can play an important role that's really really  important and I mean living up here I mean you're in Minnesota too there's  even if you have your critters in the pasture I mean there's snow on the ground  
**[0:32:16-0:32:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:32:16):**  for many months of the year so feed is an important conversation anyone who  lives in the north and does any sort of ranching farming you know of animals in  the north like you realize that there are limitations to this more utopian  pasture-fed model because the weather doesn't really cooperate when it's like  20 below and frozen you can't send them out to graze it just doesn't work like  
**[0:32:39-0:32:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:32:39):**  that yeah and I think too it's important for you know those people thinking about  eating chickens and there's lots of great companies that have ever really  thought about that and marketed it well and that's why you see so much price  stratification in the egg market already so I think they've really been eating  the way on that side I think there's room for you know even the feed pellets  
**[0:32:57-0:33:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:32:57):**  that they buy you know it doesn't need to be 100% switch to proso millet but can  five ten percent start to work its way into the crashes to help everybody save  water and is there you know marketing sustainability goals that can be met by  making those inclusions I think there's a real you know business case as you  said leading back to the original question of why mill is going to be  
**[0:33:19-0:33:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:33:19):**  important over the next 10 to 15 years and I think really you know much much  broader and larger as we get further down the road Wow that's a really  thought-provoking thanks for taking us down that journey of just thinking on a  larger level about the impact just beyond that kind of narrow focus of like  adding some millet to your bread you know yeah so that is that is really  
**[0:33:42-0:33:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:33:42):**  really interesting so you know when when I look at like the farmers that you're  mostly working with you've talked about the Midwest but what have you seen as  far as farmer adoption in other places I mean do you really see the best use case  in the Midwest where it's heavily row cropped and we're you know looking to  diversify those rotations are you seeing some other adoption patterns and other  
**[0:34:02-0:34:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:34:02):**  places where people like California for instance where they're under significant  drought pressure and they've been doing maybe specialty crops like maybe they've  been orchards and they just had to pull all those orchards out and they're  looking for something that could create an ROI rather than letting the land go  fallow have you worked with anybody there yeah so actually the story of year  
**[0:34:22-0:34:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:34:22):**  one here for us really commercializing what we're doing at dryland genetics is  it's kind of that story in general where you know initially we had a pretty  narrow focus of you know can we go and compete against the major varieties  being sold in Colorado Nebraska and have success and that's certainly been the  case as you know like I said there hasn't been new varieties released  
**[0:34:43-0:34:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:34:43):**  since 1994 so those wins are you know I've come a bit easier than we expected  but really you know what we expected has happened but just much faster than we  thought of people especially in areas that are really watertight today where  water cost them money you know California Idaho Nevada Arizona you know  all those areas Utah we've got tons of interest there but you know the  
**[0:35:10-0:35:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:35:10):**  environments are really vastly different and that is where you know kind of the  amazing power of the plant of millet itself has read its head to be able to  flex with what we do at dryland genetics and again I you know it's a bit  proprietary but I don't know enough to get us into any trouble but our reader  has has created you know a rapid cycling program where he's able to get four to  
**[0:35:34-0:35:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:35:34):**  five generations worth worth of development done every season so you  know we've got a massive stock of somewhere around like over 1,500 lines  that we're developing for you know basically geographic improvements and  we've got tests amazing in you know South Dakota potentially North Dakota  your work on stuff in Kansas Texas Oklahoma potentially and and then you  
**[0:36:02-0:36:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:36:02):**  know new development not quite yet done but hopefully out in Nevada and  California as a possibility as well almost plenty of seasons we might have  to shift it might be more fall focused than summer focus to temperatures but  we're we're really hoping to be you know growing and developing varieties kind of  in ten plus states within the year that's amazing yeah I mean for people  
**[0:36:24-0:36:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:36:24):**  who are listening and aren't really familiar with these plants like millet  you know they're they're different in the fact that they're really sensitive  traditionally sensitive to really cool nights but you know there are varieties  that can be found that do have more tolerance while still performing under  really intense daytime heat and you know my first-hand experience with proso  
**[0:36:45-0:36:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:36:45):**  pilots was with our Washington State University program diversifying fields  and pallets is with dr. Kevin Murphy and his his research group where we're  looking at you know developing some prosos that will work in our neck of the  woods here in the inland Northwest and we had a pilot growing at my friend  Jason Bishop's farm conventional wheat background large-scale commodity AG and  
**[0:37:10-0:37:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:37:10):**  he planted some proso right after he harvested some wheat and of course like  they put it in the ground they drilled it right they directly drilled it into  the wheat stubble so it had some protection against the elements and boom  all sudden it was like a hundred and fifteen degrees for a week right when  these little guys were seedlings it never had a drop of rain never once it  
**[0:37:31-0:37:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:37:31):**  was seeded completely hundred percent dry the entire lifespan of this crop  over a hundred degrees I think it was some god-awful number like 20 days or  something I'm probably exaggerating Jason can ping in in the comments and  correct me but we still harvested proso I mean it wasn't it was stunted it wasn't  perfect it wasn't the highest quality but it actually produced seed like  
**[0:37:54-0:37:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:37:54):**  that's crazy I was absolutely blown away or you know a lot of the farmers in that  area had really intense wheat losses that year too because of the heat so if  I'm telling the story incorrectly Jason can come in and correct us but to me it  was a real testament to the resiliency of proso as a crop in and standing up in  the face of significant environmental pressure no and I think you know we're  
**[0:38:16-0:38:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:38:16):**  seeing some of those same you know pressures um right now at a time when  we're trying to commercialize and that's helpful but I think really just part of  that larger story of stress makes change you know what's going on with where we  in Southwest Kansas and the Texas Oklahoma panhandle is giving us an  opportunity to maybe fill some of that gap this year as a short-term tool and  
**[0:38:38-0:38:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:38:38):**  really encouraging us to after after talking with more growers in that area  they're really looking for solutions that can help and be you know just just  more efficient on using very minimal water as you know you've we've all seen  and heard the horror stories and you can go on Twitter right now and sort of  follow along with week two or 22 and see you know the dryness they're dealing  
**[0:39:00-0:39:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:39:00):**  with just in Southwest Kansas you know it's a problem and I think a decibel  yeah and I certainly think that you know millet's gonna be a tool that can play  that role in the future of a crop that can grow it help fill in that gap after  winter eat that's that's kind of typically how it's grown in Colorado  today is that in a rotation with it so I think there's tons of room to grow there  
**[0:39:23-0:39:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:39:23):**  especially as that gluten-free non wheat flower world grows along with it and  that's one you know I do in my role every day is trying to try to make sure  we we know the crops gonna take off on the grower side try to make sure enough  people are hearing about it interested in it trying to include it that we grow  the demand side at the same time as we grow the supply side so that there's not  
**[0:39:47-0:39:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:39:47):**  a collapsing market situation where you know farmers leap into it trying to do  their best and then end up getting burned on the yeah as a market well  right yeah which is a big deal I mean I do get calls from farmers oh geez  sometimes it's like four or five days a week um farmers that are like hey I want  to grow millet we want to grow for snacktivists because we're working  
**[0:40:07-0:40:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:40:07):**  towards regenerative we're doing all this stuff we'd like to avoid just  selling to the silo we need alternative path to market and we don't we're a  growing startup so we don't have the demand pull yet to support all these  farmers that are desperately wanting to grow for us also the other thing we're  up against as you and I have talked about a lot is that value-added  
**[0:40:26-0:40:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:40:26):**  processing piece and the economics behind shipping it somewhere to be  dehulled and then shipping it to be milled and then making it into a product  it's you know that just adds a lot of unnecessary fluff to the profit margin  just because you're hauling it all over the country there's no efficiency in  that value-added processing piece and I know for us in the Northwest here we'd  
**[0:40:46-0:40:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:40:46):**  like to have more millet and more diversified grains but we really lack  access to secondary processing you know it's just we can clean it but we can't  dehull it and we and we definitely can't mill it so if you could just talk about  that for a couple more minutes before we go into our final topics that'd be great  yeah I think that's really you know a big part of what we do and do and what  
**[0:41:07-0:41:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:41:07):**  I've seen since I've come on board is like a lot of small grains that have  been left behind and haven't grown into a big monocrop the processing world just  isn't built around it yet and I think it's really one of the stories of why  millet's going to be a success is a you know if you think about it compared to  the way quinoa took off you know that was sourcing stuff that was grown in  
**[0:41:30-0:41:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:41:30):**  these really beautiful image ways for consumers to think about but they're  also not super sustainable when you have to grow something in the Andes and then  it's shipping through containers and you're shipping it all over the world  and processing they're processing it here you know this is a sort of a move  that we can get ahead of and build the supply chain out on the front end and  
**[0:41:50-0:41:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:41:50):**  grow the crop right here so you think it can be you know thrown in the United  States if some of those bottlenecks can be reduced if people start dehulling it  in the same locations that they're milling it that reduces an entire extra  truck trip which is gonna make it more sustainable and more cost effective for  you know big companies to go out and pick it up as an ingredient and it'll  
**[0:42:12-0:42:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:42:12):**  work I've talked to for consumers who wanna go said like yeah we kind of know  the mill story we're interested but it's really expensive it's hard to get a hold  of we don't have a secure supply chain though right now they've been hesitant  to add it to it yeah it's a tough thing with big customers yeah I mean if you're  General Mills you can't roll out a international snack line made out of  
**[0:42:35-0:42:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:42:35):**  prosom millet today because you know you really need littler brands like me like  snacktivists to be like hey let's do this at our scale and then scale it up  and we bring the whole you know industry with us and then eventually you know it  makes a lot more sense but it's gonna take some time and you have to be more  nimble to accommodate that so larger brands have a really tough time being  
**[0:42:56-0:42:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:42:56):**  nimble in that way it's like turning a warship instead of turning a tugboat you  know my goal is to try to you know sort of be there to be a resource for the  industry as well to is if there's anyone out there wondering you know how they  can get their hands on millet today or we think a partner within the future you  know reach out and go to the dryland genetic website go to the contact that's  
**[0:43:18-0:43:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:43:18):**  page you can you can find me on there it's all I do every day is try to find  ways to to grow the millet market so I'm I'm open for anybody looking to know how  they can gain access to it we'll make sure to put all those links in the show  notes too but you know just to wrap it up here John I'm you know I just want to  touch on this whole notion of regenerative food systems regenerative  
**[0:43:39-0:43:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:43:39):**  agriculture and it's a growing buzzword and that's definitely at risk of some  serious greenwashing right now but you know I just was wondering since you have  spent your whole professional career in commodities and agricultural you know  items coming out of agricultural systems like when did you first hear about  regenerative as a notion and what do you think that regenerative as a concept  
**[0:44:01-0:44:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:44:01):**  like regenerative by design like the name of this podcast is thinking about  how we create resilient regenerative worlds intentionally rather than always  just responding in this like emergency knee-jerk kind of fashion in response to  crisis like what can we do to be really intentional about building a food system  that's gonna feed 12 billion people without exhausting the planet it sooner  
**[0:44:27-0:44:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:44:27):**  than later yeah I think it's a hard part you know if everything we do in  corporate America there's not enough generational thinking which leads to to  some short-sightedness I think there's been you know really large companies  with all the best intentions in the world you've gone out there and and stake  their claims but I think it's really gonna be you know dependent on those  
**[0:44:45-0:44:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:44:45):**  leaders leaders like yourself and small business leaders at scale of large  businesses of being intentional about you know I've made the claims I really  now need to actually go back them up there's ways you can do that by you know  leaning into companies like ours or yours and find ways to you know tap into  regenerative brands that are gonna make you more profitable in the long run but  
**[0:45:11-0:45:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:45:11):**  I think it it's got to be done without a you know one quarter at a time cogs  reduction model on the sourcing side as well too and I think companies are  definitely making those shifts as they've made those claims and when I say  cogs in case that's a buzzword for any listeners to you it's got cost of goods  sold you know cost reduction you know if you're anybody working in large  
**[0:45:31-0:45:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:45:31):**  corporate sourcing that's generally what you're focused on but I think as those  ESG goals become real and important and some regulation can come around those I  think that helped drive the change but at the same time it yeah really just  gonna take leaders taking risks to make those moves now and I think they'll  really position their you know companies well ahead for the long term and I think  
**[0:45:54-0:45:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:45:54):**  you know through what we've seen consumers do in organics what they want  for shortness of supply chain and clean labeling consumers are going to drive  that market as well to making those conscious choices as a shopper with your  everyday actions corporations are going to respond to those and they're gonna  drive towards the profitability of trying to capture your market share so  
**[0:46:13-0:46:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:46:13):**  you know personal and then you know corporations being willing to take the  leap they'll be the first ones and they'll get customer loyalty forever  with you especially in the generation that's gonna follow because I think it's  it's so important to them you know they've grown up reading about it and  hearing about it I think it's gonna drive even more every bit yeah I agree  
**[0:46:35-0:46:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:46:35):**  you know I mean the younger generation I have kids in the younger generation that  are now teenagers and becoming more vocal and they're you know I look at my  friends kids that are college age and in their 20s and you know and what they  talk about and generally I feel like they're like we're tired of you guys  forsaking our future just to make a buck today like you know obviously everybody  
**[0:46:57-0:47:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:46:57):**  wants to be profitable everybody wants to make money but they're they're tired  of that prioritizing and driving decision-making that is actually leaving  them a world where they're not confident they're gonna have a quality of life  like we do today and in fact they're pretty much sure that they're inheriting  a complete dumpster fire at least according to the kids that I talked to  
**[0:47:18-0:47:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:47:18):**  and I'm like look I'm I'm working I'm dedicated my whole life to try to leave  you guys a better world but they're like yeah but you're like one in a million so  yeah I just think that like as we push out this broader adoption of this  concept of creating resiliency in our food system we really do need to think  about the authentic message it sends the next generation and guess what if we  
**[0:47:39-0:47:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:47:39):**  keep having the great resignation we're all in a bunch of trouble so  corporations need to step it up and get real about putting their walk into their  talk and their money into their decision-making in an investment  perspective where we look at long-term sustainability as its own asset class  and that's the only way we're gonna get buy-in from this next generation as  
**[0:47:58-0:48:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:47:58):**  workers as consumers and is and in participants that keep the world going  so that there's someone to care for us when we're elderly I mean I'm a nurse  I'm like horrified at the thought of people not wanting to work when I'm 80  if I'm still around it's a really scary thought so I just think we need to  change the way we're looking at things radically and get very very real about  
**[0:48:18-0:48:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:48:18):**  what's making the world tick and it's not what your shareholder profits last  quarter were I mean it just isn't so it's um it's a new world so thanks so  much for sharing your perspective with us John and again like and you know as  far as action items people what they could do to get involved and you you  said how to get in touch with you but what's your final thought on how  
**[0:48:40-0:48:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:48:40):**  consumers and listeners can get involved in this and make a difference I mean I  think consumers thinking about it I would just say you know your loudest  voice is gonna be with your shopping choices you know and look beyond you  know one big word on the front of a label because I think there's definitely  a view in the world that doesn't get spoken about enough where large companies  
**[0:49:01-0:49:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:49:01):**  see that as you know they've they've seen that the price consumers are  willing to pay but they don't want to absorb a pass-through cost to do it it  looks like a margin opportunity so the more you shift to the brands and I think  you know your large corporations lots of them are seeing this and we're seeing  that see change of why they're going out there and staking their claims because  
**[0:49:21-0:49:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:49:21):**  the small brands have gotten done it and eaten away on market share for years and  I think that's you know the morning worth pay attention and care about that  stuff means you know the more likely that change is gonna come I would say  from a perspective get involved by you know being conscious and making those  personal choices about what you eat and your dollars will speak more volume than  
**[0:49:41-0:49:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:49:41):**  then you will doing anything else and on the corporate side I would just not the  encouraging those leaders who are driving for change you know not even  just from a sustainability climate sounds like it's gonna do wonders for  you for earnings for future growth for future brand loyal yeah yeah it's a  long-term profitability play I mean it really is from you know a pure economic  
**[0:50:04-0:50:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:50:04):**  model but consumers vote every day three times a day at least every time they put  something in their mouth so it's something that we really need to be  cognizant of and it's it's not about being perfect it's about making little  steps every day to improve that and to really put the walk in our talk and all  work together to make this world a better place it's not right it's not  
**[0:50:23-0:50:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:50:23):**  left it's forward as my friend Jason says so yeah I'm you know I just really  feel hopeful that we can do this and I meet people like you and your team and  the the whole team behind dryland genetics I have kind of a deep  relationship into that team all the way to you know some of the backers and I  just see that it's a bunch of people who really are putting their walk and with  
**[0:50:45-0:50:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:50:45):**  their talk and really working every day to make a huge dent in this planet and  and for humanity so thank you absolutely yep I think there's there's hope for the  future and honestly really my my hope lies in in seeing the agricultural  system as it works the day knowing how resilient and able to change it has been  in the past and will in the future I think I think change is coming and it's  
**[0:51:06-0:51:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:51:06):**  gonna be for the better yeah me too so thanks so much John I really appreciate  you joining us and have an awesome day all right you too thanks John thank you  for joining us on the regenerative by design podcast if you would like to  learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and  agriculture please see the show notes for links to education a glossary and  
**[0:51:27-0:51:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/ee24a16e#t=0:51:27):**  guest information this podcast was brought to you by snacktivist Inc a  leader in the regenerative food industry we create delicious foods from  regenerative ingredients that are soil focused minimize water use and maximize  carbon sequestration all while radically impacting human nutrition learn more  about our work at snacktivist foods calm  