---
title: A Forward Look On Agriculture From An Organic Farmers Perspective A Discussion With Tim Cornie
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-08-18)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Tim Cornie  

**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:00:44):**  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  Hello and welcome to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we aim to get to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  And today I have an awesome guest, very excited friend of mine by the name of Tim Corney, who is a farmer in Buell, Idaho.  And he's doing some really incredible future forward things in agriculture and in food.  And today he's going to tell us a little bit about his story, but I think it's really intriguing to know where people come from  
**[0:01:25-0:01:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:01:25):**  and what makes them come to these realizations that there's a little bit more to life than what meets the eye.  And I know Tim's got a really cool story of how he came to be an organic and regenerative farmer in Buell, Idaho.  So Tim, welcome.  Thank you.  And I would love for you to tell us a little bit about your background, like how did you get to be the Tim Corney that I know today?  
**[0:01:49-0:01:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:01:49):**  Well, I started off as a conventional farmer years ago. I started farming in 91 and I,  my dad was a conventional farmer and I thought that's the way it was supposed to be.  And then, so my dad ended up getting Parkinson's and he died at Parkinson's, I gave him cancer and I think it had to do with residual chemicals.  I have a son.  What year was that?  
**[0:02:16-0:02:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:02:16):**  He died two years ago.  My son got tuberous cirrhosis, which is benign tubers in the brain and he's got one behind the heart and behind the eye.  And, you know, when I was young, we handled, you know, Sondland, Aptem and stuff like that with the, you know, beans and then, you know, used.  What kind of chemicals are those? Just so our listeners know.  Well, they were bean chemicals and then they weren't working because every year I think other farmers were adding another pint and thinking it was going to get weed control.  
**[0:02:45-0:02:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:02:45):**  And then, you know, and then you're handling 2,4-D and spraying weeds, you got this backpack and it splashes and it gets on your deal.  And I was giving a talk to a group and I said, you know, I can smell 2,4-D and I can taste it on my tongue.  I remember the smell and taste of that.  Yeah.  It's very distinctive.  
**[0:03:04-0:03:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:03:04):**  Very distinctive.  And so you smell it. But here I am, you know, I've been organic farming for 14 years and, you know, and maybe 15 years.  And so here I go all that far back and then I can, if I smell it, I can taste it.  And so what was that in my DNA? Did I genetically alter my son's health?  Right.  
**[0:03:25-0:03:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:03:25):**  And don't know.  Right.  And so, you know, these are hard questions.  They are.  And, you know, we've talked about the cancer belts along the, you know, there's some huge cancer belts and the runoff of chemicals and fertilizers and insecticides.  
**[0:03:40-0:03:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:03:40):**  And so, you know, we had a neighbor kid who got pancreatic cancer and he died.  And then, you know, there's people with tumors and, you know, in the bottom.  You've seen it first.  I'm seeing it firsthand.  And, you know, they built a brand new St. Luke's cancer ward over there.  
**[0:03:55-0:04:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:03:55):**  And you drive by in the parking lot school, you know, where they're getting their treatments and stuff like that.  Wow.  So there aren't that many people down there.  No, no.  They're flying in too because they put up a hell of a deal.  
**[0:04:07-0:04:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:04:07):**  But the thing is, though, we have gotten out of balance.  We have gone too far the other way.  And the thing is, though, when you start looking biologically on how the soil works, you know, all wealth and health comes from the soil.  And so, you know, when you look at the rainforest or the redwoods and you see all that massive growth, that was biological activity from leaves and bugs and whatever that did its magic.  And so we're mimicking that farming.  
**[0:04:33-0:04:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:04:33):**  And so we and Kurt, my cousin and I are partners and we bought a Pillsbury plant in Buol, Idaho, and we're able to haul our commodities right from the field there, clean it and color sort it and package it and go into the retail stores.  And so we're able to handle it one time.  Yeah.  And so we're not having all this trucking across the country thing.  And so and we're big on soil health and biology.  
**[0:05:01-0:05:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:05:01):**  You know, we're running sheep or putting cover crop or putting kale and tillage radish and peas and and nourishing, we're nourishing it.  Right. And, you know, Gabe Rand said something one time.  There's more nitrogen in the atmosphere sitting over a grain bin full of nitrogen prills, you know, the fertilizer than what's in that tank.  And he's absolutely right.  You know, and so we you can naturally pull that nitrogen from the atmosphere with the right kind of cover crop and put that in nitrogen nodules.  
**[0:05:31-0:05:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:05:31):**  That's what plants are good at.  That's what they're for.  And you know, the fungi that help fix that nitrogen.  But yeah, boy, you know, it's so fascinating where you come from, you know, being from a very conventional and often if you're taught to be a conventional farmer and then you're looking to do something differently than your dad did, there could be a lot of pushback for that.  Well, you sometimes can't go to the coffee shop. You get ridiculed, you know, and and there and because you think differently and then they believe you can't feed them the world with organic farming.  
**[0:06:03-0:06:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:06:03):**  But the bottom line is, is we're the unhealthiest we've ever been in the United States.  And we're creating bulk cheap food that has no nutritional value.  And we're using those fillers and we're using too many chemicals.  And so I get I'll tell you another little adventure that I had.  So I had my daughter in 4-H and I had a guy there.  
**[0:06:29-0:06:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:06:29):**  It was there and he was he was German.  And and so he was there and kind of stranded.  And and I, I said, well, here, I got an extra pickup and I got an extra house.  I said, just take this pickup and go drive everywhere you want to go see and do.  And that's amazing.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:06:48):**  Yeah. And I had this extra house. Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And he's one of the high end horse trainers in Germany right now and works with a lot of and he has a horse ranch over there.  And so he was so grateful for what, you know, and we became good friends.  He wanted me to he said, you come over to Europe and I'll take anywhere you want to go.  And so I learned so much from him. You know, he he was born behind the communist wall.  
**[0:07:13-0:07:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:07:13):**  And when the wall came down, he was able to travel to India, Brazil, all over the world.  And he had a whole different perspective on things. And he was heavy in the food industry as far as chefs and high end stuff.  And so when you go to Europe, they're very their beer is amazing.  They don't want any preservatives in their food. It's natural.  And so he said to him, he goes, we're sitting there in the parking lot and he goes, see all these restaurants over here?  
**[0:07:41-0:07:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:07:41):**  He goes, that food's dead. Our food's a lot.  And and he goes, he was basically saying we put so many preservatives, so much sugar the way we process our food.  Just nuke it. Yeah. And he says over there, you know, when you when you go over to Germany and you eat their bread, if you throw a totally different experience, it's a meal and goat cheese and the whole thing.  When you lay that bread on that table, if you don't eat it in three days, it starts to mold.  Yeah, because it's a lot. Right. And that's how they look at food.  
**[0:08:12-0:08:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:08:12):**  And so they have a legacy of organic farming, bio farming.  Yes. Permaculture. Yes. It's just a different mindset.  Well, and it was beautiful for me, you know, to have that experience, you know, and so I was here that was that was in 2014.  And I actually want to go to Ukraine. And I was because there was that have unbelievable, massive, super great soil.  And I wanted to see that. And then Putin was beaten on the door there with the war at that time.  
**[0:08:39-0:08:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:08:39):**  Yeah. So then I end up sleeping in the back of a van. We had a diesel van with a bed in it.  And I traveled all through Germany and France and Spain and Switzerland and Austria.  And then I'm great. What a great event. Yeah. I went over to Morocco and came back and I had amazing eating experience.  Amazing. I met phenomenal people. Very, very intelligent.  And the food culture is just radically different. Way different. And also they had robotic technology.  
**[0:09:05-0:09:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:09:05):**  You know, they have these little robots that push feet up on the dairy cows and all the dairies around 300 cows mainly.  And they have an M1 or a Lely robotic milker that'll come in there and and clean the teats and then automatically milk them.  It's all like technology driven. Yeah. No one's there.  And then the cows come in, they get milked and they walk in and milk themselves and then go out. And then.  And it's just. Yeah. So they have a really a lot of animal husbandry.  
**[0:09:35-0:09:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:09:35):**  And and so I just had such a great experience when I came back. I was telling Kurt, I said, Kurt, you know, we had quit feeding cattle and start feeding people.  And so. And so we.  Kurt, my cousin was a sharp kid and he agreed, and so we decided, OK, let's pull our resources here and let's make this happen.  And we were really fortunate to be able to pick up a huge facility. We can load five rail cars at a time and five unloading docks.  Yeah. You know, we got a lot of power. Right there. Right there. And so you couldn't beat a better system that we got.  
**[0:10:10-0:10:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:10:10):**  And so. So anyway, so here we are and we're trying to make a meal replacement bar that is super healthy.  The only sugar in is that is actually honey. Raw honey is a binder to it and it meets all your nutrient requirements.  And because a lot of these meal bars are candy bars. Oh, yeah. And so. Yeah.  So we really came up with one. We have a gal by the name of Amber who can. She's like Beethoven.  You know, she just has this natural ability. She came from a cow camp in Battle Mountain, Nevada, and she can just cook like you can't believe.  
**[0:10:45-0:10:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:10:45):**  And so she's our research developer. That's cool. Yeah.  So we're and we're we're working with some of these ancient corn and bees go crazy in ancient corn.  And so we're big about bees. Yeah. And a lot of people don't realize that.  And my guess is most people listening to this podcast probably are aware of that.  But what do you notice as a farmer between like your, you know, heritage, old world organic corn or when you walk into one of these huge mega monocrop cornfields?  
**[0:11:15-0:11:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:11:15):**  Well, I know it sounds weird, but I got a lot of ducks that mob my fields that don't go to the neighbors.  So if that means anything, I don't know. Yeah, I do. I'll say they circle my fields.  But but I don't know what that means. But we're really bee friendly. Our pheasant population's really expanded, you know, and because you see life growing.  Yeah. Yeah. But we're planting sunflowers and we're planting flowers and we're putting buckwheat behind crops because it that's a kind of a natural thing to help bring the phosphate available with buckwheat to the next crop and the bees like need the, you know, when it's flowering.  So, yeah, I feel like we're really on the right path and you're always learning.  
**[0:11:58-0:12:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:11:58):**  I mean, we don't have this thing dialed in 100 percent, but we're getting better and better every year.  Well, that's part of the fun of it, I think, is like you never reach perfection. It's like the more you learn, the more you realize you have to learn.  Yes. And as a farmer, you have the overlay of every year being different.  And, you know, you've got weather and you've got water and you've got temperature and they're never predictable.  No. And they're just going to do whatever. So it's like the ultimate artistry to coax, you know, food out of the land against all those different variables.  
**[0:12:32-0:12:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:12:32):**  Well, and also I want to start talking about the drought a little bit.  Yeah, let's do it. I really have been concerned about this drought.  Yeah. I've got friends that, but we buy some, we can't grow rice in Idaho, so we go to the northern part of California and we got some family farms that grow.  They've been 44 years organic farming in rice. Really good people.  And so we source from them. And because of Lake Shasta and Lake Orville.  
**[0:13:03-0:13:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:13:03):**  Yeah, they're so low. They're so low. And so there's only going to be 25 percent of the acres planted this year into rice.  Wow. And they've had a freeze. You know, I've had some almonds get burnt and some olive trees.  And so they're dealing with some damage there. They don't know what that looks like yet.  Twenty five percent. Yes. Is significant. It's significant.  And I have guys call me farmers from all over the country, you know, and Oregon and what have you, and say we don't have any water in the reservoir.  
**[0:13:33-0:13:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:13:33):**  And, you know, Hollister, that's south of Twin Falls. It's a different, it's on the salmon track.  You know, they only got that 30 days of water. So they're just going to water their existing alfalfa that's established and then they're going to collect insurance.  And so they can't plant another crop that that might, you know, do something. It's a gamble.  And so, you know, so that's out of production. You got the rice that's gone or whatever.  And then I have friends in the Nebraska and they had a really dry winter, but they're pulling out of the Ocolala Aquifer, which is OK, which, you know, saves is a saving grace.  
**[0:14:07-0:14:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:14:07):**  But we all know that Ocolala Aquifer is going to there's too many straws.  Yeah. And I was down in Lubbock, Texas, in Amarillo, and I was talking to some farmers down there and and I asked him, I go,  how long do you think you're going to be able to to be able to farm with, you know, their water out of the ground?  And he goes, man, if we got eight years, I'll be surprised.  They were putting in drip systems and trying to do every conservation program they could to try to stay there.  
**[0:14:34-0:14:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:14:34):**  And, you know, that's why I'm a big fan of this cover crop and what Gabe Brown's doing, because he's educating the masses.  And he's really getting these and these farmers are paying attention because the truth is, if we can build that,  that the soil profile and the micro or the organic matter and get them get that soil, the aggregates in the soil to where it holds that moisture,  get that rhizosphere beefed up. Exactly. It's creating its own ecosystem stability. Exactly. It's it's a game changer.  Well, if they have three less irrigations a year because they can hold that extra water in the profile, it just makes things stretch a little bit further.  
**[0:15:13-0:15:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:15:13):**  And so I just I think that that's a big game changer.  And I think that cover cropping is the answer. And and trying to figure out the no till organic way.  Now, here's the other thing that I wanted to also talk about is there's people are confused about regenerative farming,  organic farming, non GMO and what have you. And I think you're like, lay it out.  Let's lay it out. So the bottom line is majority of the regenerative farming, they are using chemicals because they're no tilling and not disturbing that soil.  
**[0:15:48-0:15:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:15:48):**  They're coming in there with glyphosate. They're coming in with other chemicals.  OK, now you have some people that have dialed in that are using the rye and smothering it.  And they're able to use a lot less chemicals doing whatever.  But when you're organic farming in our world, from my experience at this point and we're experimenting all the time.  You know, I'm right now got a little experiment going on with the small acreage of black medic, which is a micro clover that only gets about four inches tall.  
**[0:16:15-0:16:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:16:15):**  And it gets it gets as thick as a hair on a dog's back. Well, that's a nitrogen fixing. Right. Yeah.  So my our thought is if we can get that really thick and we go in there, no tail and then be able to put that corn in there or some beans or whatever,  then that will choke those weeds, still fix the nitrogen, whatever. So this is something we're working on right now.  That's cool stuff. So that would come in as an annual. It's an annual.  And then you just leave it there and you just direct drill the corn seed right in on top of that.  
**[0:16:40-0:16:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:16:40):**  Yeah. Leaving that soil all intact. Right.  Kind of charged up with the nutrients and then you're not needing to go in and disrupt the soil there. Right.  That's that's cool because if you can figure that out, this organic regenerative, like you said.  That space in between the two still has a lot of pioneering technology and thought and practice and tools.  Right. It's it's like a renaissance. Well, and I see I think technology and camera, camera technology is getting so good.  
**[0:17:11-0:17:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:17:11):**  And this is another thing I want to bring up. Is that.  All the everything's there, we got these color sorters that can do, you know, twelve thousand pounds an hour.  You know, coming through these cameras that we know we see a defect, it'll blow it out.  But, you know, and so the bottom line is, is the same camera technology.  And I go to these food shows and I see these robots move so fast, it'll move a ping pong ball in seven locations in the blink of an eye.  
**[0:17:38-0:17:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:17:38):**  That you're going to be able to take a cyber truck or Ford Lightning, let's say, with a sliding camper shell type thing that's got these wings on it.  That's 30 foot in the back. This is an example. You know, could be a track, you know, whatever.  Yeah. But the bottom line is that day's coming to where you're going to be able to put that Roomba out in that field and let it go day and night.  Right. And Cruz. And it's going to have some sort of intelligence.  It's good. Yes. It's going to be able to monitor that plan.  
**[0:18:06-0:18:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:18:06):**  So, OK, you've got disease here or you've got a bunch of aphid. Let's go out there and release a bunch of lacewings and bloody bugs in that region.  Right. And then instead of using.  Yeah, the pesticides and all that, that it's going to be able to monitor the crop as it goes.  Imagine the data collection alone. I mean, just what we could learn about the intricacies of plant growth and predatory cycling and like with the insects and weather.  Like suddenly if you had all of that life data continuously collected.  
**[0:18:37-0:18:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:18:37):**  Right. I mean, it would actually probably impact.  Some, you know, some of the study of farming from a really scientific level. Yeah. Research level.  Yeah. So I can take care of some of the problems while it's at it.  Like that could be a pretty well. Exactly. The thing is, you know, I want to go back to, you know, in Germany, they they do the extensive study.  They take women's breast milk and they take fat cell to pull a sample of a fat cell and and they take it and have it analyzed.  
**[0:19:04-0:19:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:19:04):**  They'll take it from here and take it over there and they'll put it to this lab and the scotch guard from your carpets and upholstery to household chemicals, to pesticides, insecticides.  Yes. And it's showing up in that fat cell and that we're holding on to that toxicity.  And so the bottom line is and I, farmers and I have this heated discussion that, you know, we can't feed the world organically.  But and they are not incorrect right now. But if we can jump in a Tesla car and self drive itself across the United States without touching the wheel.  Yeah. I'm pretty sure that we can go over a field of eight, twelve rows at a mile and a half an hour and be able to weed that thing.  
**[0:19:46-0:19:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:19:46):**  Yeah. That's a very good point. And identify that the weed at a two leaf stage and say this is a morning glory, this is a night shade, this is the lamb's quarter.  This is, you know, redwood or what have you in a cockaburr. And it's going to say, OK, you're gone.  But yet we're going to leave a micro clover and a pea that's going to fix a nitrogen so we can have multidiversity in this crop.  And so this technology makes it harder for those weeds to get established. Exactly.  Anyhow, like suddenly they're competing with not only your crop for space, but with those cover crops.  
**[0:20:19-0:20:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:20:19):**  Well, and then we don't and then there's no excuse for the GMOs, you know, and I know the bear bought Monsanto and they, you know, they they make the pharmaceutical drug and they make a chemical and they own the seed patents and they own the whole integrated deal.  And so there's a lot of money in keeping you barely alive. And that's what they you know, this is what it looks like to me.  Yeah. Chemically dependent food system will make a chemically dependent population. And that's really good for profits.  Well, they're going to they're going to fight, you know, because a lot of money in cancer, what they make in cancer, you know, they're not going to have a cure because there's too much billions of billions of dollars made in that.  And so the bottom line is people that are educated to listen to podcasts like this are going to say, OK, you know, I'm going to eat clean.  
**[0:21:02-0:21:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:21:02):**  I'm going to exercise, you know, and handle stress. It's you know, it's all about a balance in life.  And it's all the components put together. And so I think that and this makes me optimistic for the future of farming, because I think that you can get a kid that has not want to come back to the family farm because the farm the farmers are getting old.  Yeah. I mean, the average age of farmers in America is, I think, 60.  Yeah. And so the kids don't really want to come back because it's a lot of work. And then they and up to this point, they're just not making enough money.  But I think if they could get into this kind of new farming, you know, they're making a difference. Yeah.  
**[0:21:43-0:21:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:21:43):**  And there was probably a purpose. They got resignation. Yes. About money anymore. It's about purpose.  Exactly. And my biggest and here's one of my concerns that I have and we talked about this before is these hedge funds are buying a lot of this farmland.  Bill Gates has bought three hundred thousand acres of farmland.  And and we I got some men and I friends in Mississippi and Oprah Winfrey and Bill Gates bought that farm in there and there, whatever they call their hedge fund.  But wild anyway. So they they they're not happy about it. They don't want they don't want to farm.  
**[0:22:16-0:22:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:22:16):**  And they'd rather own their own land. Yeah. And and so but the but these hedge funds have come in and offered so much more.  They're out competing their local farmer. You can't afford to buy it. Yeah.  So what I don't like the idea of is the fact is that these hedge funds own all the farmland and they're coming to the farmer and say, you farm it.  You're going to pay me five percent. We're going to pay too much for it. You're going to give us six hundred dollars an acre rent.  Then all of a sudden, just like all these corporations that own all these apartment complexes and they keep up in the rent from fifteen hundred eighteen hundred or twenty one hundred.  
**[0:22:48-0:22:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:22:48):**  And then you you know, and so system. Well, all of a sudden we're all a bunch of serfs. Right.  And so we have no control of your farming techniques. Absolutely.  I heard this from a lot of farmers. Yeah. Like, hey, I want to I want to grow for you and we're going to minimize any chemicals.  We're going to go for regenerative. That's our goal is to be as close to organic as possible regenerative.  But my landlords won't give me permission. That's correct.  
**[0:23:13-0:23:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:23:13):**  And then the county is going to dock us and then we can't get crop insurance because they say if you plant millet.  Right. That you lose your crop insurance on your other crops. That's because you're leaving that to crop rotation or, you know, one crop in a fallow.  And I think people underestimate the power that these big systems, including privatization of farmlands by non farmers, is going to it's it could radically reshape our farming in a bad way.  Yes. Yeah. I did. Scary. I don't. Have you heard any stats about like how much farmland has been bought out by these guys?  No, I don't have that. My buddy Don has some really good stats.  
**[0:23:53-0:24:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:23:53):**  I'll have to have I'll reach out to him and we can post a link in the show notes about it because he's in eastern Washington and keeps up a lot on the stats and whatnot.  And it is pretty scary, you know? Yeah. But you know, I tell you what I do believe I'm I'm optimistic for the future farm.  And there's a lot of kids in FFA. We've got some kids that I've got to know that are in FFA and they they're they're excited.  And I think given the opportunity and, you know, we've even talked about it, you know, having some farm classes and workshops to get these kids, you know, out in the fields and.  And saying this is what we do. This is why we do it. And then get get them energized. You know, it takes a lot of capital to farm, you know, the equipment and all that.  
**[0:24:39-0:24:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:24:39):**  And so that's that's what's going to get started. There's no way they're going to be able to start from scratch unless their grandfather's in it.  But at least they have the interest to maybe go to the grandfather's farm or their dad's farm and maybe want to be involved.  What about people who are going to be wanting to come into farming and have no family legacy in it at all?  Like these urban folks that are wanting to I mean, do you see any sort of partnership that could happen between like a farming legacy, like family that has the land, has the equipment, doesn't have any grandkids that want to farm.  But then you meet some people from wherever, whatever they grow, Boise or Seattle or heck, L.A., I don't know.  
**[0:25:20-0:25:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:25:20):**  Like, what do you see that we could creatively do to try to foster like a new generation of farmers?  I think that that for the kids that don't have the resources, the land, I think the future for them is aquaponics and greenhouse technology.  You know, they got to call it a winnipee or it's like an underground greenhouse. You go down about 12 feet deep, 40 foot wide, whatever.  And so you've got the ground is keeping you cool during the summer, but it's also keeping you warm in the winter.  And then you feed the fish and then you feed these vegetables. And so it's so less capital intensive.  
**[0:25:56-0:26:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:25:56):**  And that right there, I think, is a future for servicing urban areas because then they are getting fresh food right there instead of growing it in California and shipping it to Boston.  Well, you're also your own ecosystem. So once you got that water self-contained, that water is recycling itself because the fish are feeding it.  And then it comes through, cycles through, and then it goes back through and the plants filter the water.  So fascinating.  Yeah. And you're just adding like maybe 20 gallons a day or 100 gallons a day, which is not very much water.  
**[0:26:28-0:26:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:26:28):**  Really efficient when you think about it.  When you think about it. So you're your own ecosystem. And so that technology is going to get better and better as well.  And I've got a friend that's very knowledgeable in it and he puts a few workshops out there.  And I think that that's going to be a great potential for kids that don't, you know, because you got to have millions of dollars to get in the game.  Yeah. And something like that. I mean, it's like it's it's a business model that you can present that could theoretically get some financing behind it to build it.  
**[0:27:01-0:27:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:27:01):**  You know, and it's not it's not like you're proposing to go buy a thousand acres of farmland.  Well, and there's so yeah. And so the USDA has programs that will the kids could go to and get a system that's already engineered design and they'll help fund it.  So, you know, there's a lot of positive things coming.  And but we got to we got to get kids educated, get them motivated.  And, you know, really getting kids to understand the role of food and health.  
**[0:27:32-0:27:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:27:32):**  I think there's a whole new generation of kids that don't buy it.  You know, this younger generation, I feel like they're much more skeptical of foods and what's in it and the effect they have on their health.  And it'll be fascinating to see how this farm food is medicine movement.  Soil health, human health connection develops with this next generation.  And I think that's, you know, I just feel like they're a little bit more susceptible to the message where other people are like, oh, you know, you talk about so you eat your food and then you go take your prescriptions.  
**[0:28:10-0:28:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:28:10):**  That's how it works. Yes. And I feel like that generation's kind of like, well, that's kind of yes.  Like, why does it have to be that way? You know, and what, you know, I just think they have a different way of looking at it.  Well, they're absolutely correct. And I'll tell you what, this Dr. William Lee, he has done some cancer research and gone into the food.  And he's like, oh, I'm not going in here. Like when you eat when you eat like we have this barley mags.  It's a cereal that's for good for gut health. And we got oatmeal and stuff like that.  
**[0:28:35-0:28:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:28:35):**  Well, there are the properties of barley actually builds new blood cells.  The research shows that we eat blueberries and strawberries and that, you know, and then when you have the cacao bean, which is a cocoa bean, and that's we're putting some of that in our meal replacement bar.  It actually shrinks, shrinks tumor.  And so and so I highly recommend people download. He does a TED talk and research Dr. William Lee.  And it really truly is. It's been since the beginning of time that, you know, food is our medicine.  
**[0:29:06-0:29:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:29:06):**  Yeah. And that's how you get your nutrients. And until we get our soil back to health.  Yeah. To get our nutrients and our minerals and our and our and all our stuff back into our body, because that's the only way you can really truly absorb it through your food.  Yeah. Yeah. And so it's those complexes that our bodies are designed to digest and assimilate.  And, you know, it's the micros in the macros are distorted in our food system.  We don't have the minerals. It's usually really high in carb, really low. And, you know, other things like high in omega six, low in omega three.  
**[0:29:37-0:29:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:29:37):**  Like there's a lot of those kind of things. But then what a lot of times I feel is overlooked is you think about all the other compounds that are present in really high quality raised foods.  That are not things that we measure. There may be not even things we understand.  And they could be the anti cancer compound that everybody's been looking for.  But here it was just present in our food this whole time. But when we switch to this mass commodity, chemically intensive farming method,  we coaxed those like secondary metabolites out of the plant because it was too stressed or maybe it needed another relationship with another plant to create that compound in the first place.  
**[0:30:16-0:30:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:30:16):**  It's a really fascinating thing. And I feel like once we make a shift of exploration, this is what I did in my first career because I was an ethnobotanist.  You take foods, you take medicinal plants, you look chemicals that affect physiology like anti cancer, anti stroke, anti, you know, whatever, anti diabetic.  And there is like a whole new world of research out there waiting that we haven't even started to scratch the surface.  Like there are there's hundreds of thousands of those compounds. We only know what 1 percent of them are.  That's right. It's pretty cool stuff. Yeah. I know. Barley is a cool crop.  
**[0:30:55-0:31:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:30:55):**  I'd like you to tell our listeners a little more about the crops you guys grow and why and how you got those crops in the first place.  Like you guys grow some awesome corn. Yeah, we got some corn.  We have an Abenaki corn that was the first corn that the Indians and the pilgrims ate together during Thanksgiving.  And then we have the Ahopi corn that that's an ancient corn growth back thousands of years.  And that's what's interesting about those two varieties is that they the bees love them.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:31:21):**  They have a lot of flavor. And then we have four different varieties of beans.  And then we got the rice and then we got the purple barley, which is from Tibet.  And then the barley mags, it's for the gut health. That's really popular and have amazing success in Australia.  And that's where that came from. Yeah. And we're growing in Idaho. We got the oatmeal.  And so and then we're trying to get ready to eat because people are on a fast paced move.  
**[0:31:45-0:31:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:31:45):**  But the other thing I wanted to bring up is that when they buy food from us and we mail to the door, you know,  Thousand Springs Mail and we have a Thousand Springs to feed our farm.  That's why we're 100 springs mail is that we can mail to your door.  And we also because we work with that, we put go in the retail stores and East Coast, West Coast and through the country.  We've also set up a fundraising program to keep the revenue in the communities.  
**[0:32:10-0:32:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:32:10):**  And so that kids get to keep 15 percent of sales. Yeah.  And so and they just got to just go on the website. Yeah.  See, this is such a cool program. I think if our listeners hear this, they're going to be like, what?  We had no idea that this was out here. Like, what a cool concept.  So for our listeners, you know, you can you can go to Tim's and Kurt's website, the Thousand Springs Mills,  
**[0:32:35-0:32:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:32:35):**  and see your kids are going to the Montessori school down the street, just for example.  And they're always looking for great fundraisers.  You can partner with these guys and create a code so that all of the family and loved ones of your students can share this code.  And a certain percentage of the proceeds will forever kick back to support their school program.  As long as you're enjoying beans and popcorn and oatmeal and barley.  
**[0:33:02-0:33:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:33:02):**  I mean, there's it's staples of things that we eat every day. Yeah.  To me, this is a no brainer. Well, you're putting healthy food in your pantry, your feeding kids healthy.  And then and then it's all organic, of course.  And the other thing is you're instead of giving that the money to the corporations in Chicago and New York or whatever,  the money stays in the community. And and so then we mail right to the door.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:33:30):**  It's on auto. You can do auto reorder. We're adding coffee. We're adding some other things to that because that way you get your coffee, your tea and your basic staples.  And so that way, when it just comes to your door, auto reorder, and then that you keep that money in the community and it builds wealth.  And with this inflation the way it is, you know, helps mom do more sports and lets that program pay for it.  Yeah. And also, when you look at the unit, the servings, you know, you're at I think was like twenty three cents a serving, 30 cents a serving.  You know, I mean, here you go out to eat and it costs eighty dollars.  
**[0:34:03-0:34:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:34:03):**  But if you cook in the Instant Pot or Crock Pot, it takes you 15 minutes to throw in four cups of water and a half cup of beans and rice and berries and purple bar or whatever.  And you throw it in there, hit the button. Yeah. And you come back and the house smells good.  Yeah. And you have this healthy, good food and you fed everybody for a dollar apiece.  It's like four dollars versus if you took him to town, it would be eighty dollars. It's a no brainer.  And now that they even make it so much simpler at grocery stores where if you really are in such a pinch, which I get.  
**[0:34:31-0:34:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:34:31):**  I mean, you're like me. We work how many hours a week? Oh, yeah. Yeah. And, you know, so you run in and our local our local health food store and our local like Albertsons has us where everything's prepped and cut up.  Like there's onion, celery, carrots, like everything you need. So if you're really in a hurry, like we'll do that and throw it in the Instant Pot and boom, you're eating an hour and a half.  Yeah. Awesome. Well, I mean, just you just feel good when you eat it. Yeah, you do. Yeah. Real food makes you feel real good.  And that's it. That is just the truth. And, you know, here I've been on I'm down here in southern Idaho right now.  I'm away from home. So I've been on the road and eating out more in restaurants. And I tell you, I've kind of hit a wall after three days where I'm like, I'm going to go to the co-op and I'm making dinner tonight in my girlfriend's house because I can't eat another meal out in a restaurant.  
**[0:35:22-0:35:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:35:22):**  I just it's good. But after a while, it really makes you feel pretty crummy. So I understand what you're saying.  But, you know, before we stop talking, though, if you don't mind us kind of going back to this concept of cancer belts and agriculture and really how our culture has made has created a very at risk population in our rural areas.  There is seen epidemic levels of neurological diseases like Parkinson's, MS. And the last recording I did in the studio was with a dear friend of mine, Dr. Travis Denton, who is a he's a medicinal chemist.  And he knows his stuff. He knows his stuff. And he is an expert in MS and Alzheimer's and Parkinson's and all these things and studying how the brain is reacting. And there is very clearly a connection with exposure to pesticides, exposure to farming chemicals and poor quality food.  Like, when do you think rural populations of people are going to stand up and say, OK, this is a thing, you know, we're down at the range. All of that even still happens anymore than most of those have closed up over the last couple of decades.  
**[0:36:34-0:36:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:36:34):**  But you start looking around when you're at church or at a community potluck or picnic and you're like, OK, how many of us have lost a parent to one of these types of diseases?  It's like 80 percent. Yes. Yeah. And I can't remember if I touched on this earlier or not. I can't remember. But, you know, my father died of Parkinson's and then got cancer.  And it was I think his chemicals was he was a chemical farmer. And your son?  So my son, yeah, he got tuberous cirrhosis and he was tipping over with seizures at the age of three. And then we went and got, you know, found out he's got these benign tubers. It's what's called tuberous cirrhosis. It's like tubers in a potato and it was growing next to the brain and one behind the eye and whatever.  And then, you know, we had a neighbor up the road who got a pancreatic cancer. He was a young guy at 42.  
**[0:37:25-0:37:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:37:25):**  Oh, it's just awful. And then you go out there and you see the planes flying in the fields with, you know, Lora's band and insecticides and whatever.  Are people making the connection in your community? You know, I've had guys at first, you know, I think they were mocking me because I'm going against the grain of the traditional farming and what have you.  And gave me a lot of grief. But when their spouse got cancer or died or whatever, they say, you know what, you're onto something.  Yeah. Yeah. And so they're starting to pay attention and we're going to get more farmers and, you know, we pay a premium.  You know, I mean, organic farming is, you know, you have to pay the lecture for it, but it's worth it.  
**[0:38:11-0:38:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:38:11):**  And but, you know, we spend quite a bit of money organic farming.  And so, you know, honestly, I really just wonder when these rural communities and I know how hard it is because I spent my life out on farms periodically.  I grew up, you know, farming and grew up with a backpack around up just, you know, by default.  I had some really weird health issues that I think are probably directly related to that.  And but still, I run up against this pushback from people.  
**[0:38:45-0:38:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:38:45):**  Like I was talking to a farmer's wife at a conference a few months ago and she's really, you know, nice lady.  And we're just talking and also out of left field, she's like, you know, I just have to say I love Roundup.  And I was like, OK, so where are you going with this? I spray it whenever I get the chance because I think it's great stuff.  And I'm like, OK, so I know you're kind of trying to goad me here, but I'm like, let's go there.  Like, let's really talk about this because, you know, why are you defensive of Roundup being looked at with some skepticism as far as public health is concerned?  
**[0:39:19-0:39:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:39:19):**  And she's like, I just think it's been villainized.  I'm like, OK, well, fair enough. Let's talk about that.  But, you know, it was fascinating to me that she's a farmer, but I'm a nurse, you know.  And I found it really odd to be arguing and at odds with someone who's trying to tell me that something's perfectly safe, but they've hardly ever set foot in the hospital unless they were there to see a loved one.  And at the end of the conversation, I just had to say, look, you know, we can agree to disagree.  
**[0:39:48-0:39:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:39:48):**  But I spent thousands of hours in health care and did everything, mostly ICU, ER, but I spent some time in hospice.  I spent some time in oncology. And I can honestly tell you from experience that the rural areas get hit harder.  Yeah, they do.  With a lot of these things, cancer definitely, but, you know, all these Parkinson's and neurological.  And she was like, well, I just don't see that as being true.  
**[0:40:14-0:40:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:40:14):**  So how do we how do we present more data to our rural populations to kind of warm up, you know, warm them up to the idea that there is some substantial data there that indicates that these cancer belts are directly related to the farming practices that they're defending so hard?  Yeah. And, you know, some people just they they believe in a car or, you know, they get caught into this routine and they accept it.  That's normal. Right.  And there's just no question about it. You know, they're finding glyphosate that attaches to the water molecule.  Yeah.  
**[0:40:50-0:40:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:40:50):**  And finding it in places that does not belong.  Like in Antarctica.  Yes.  How in the heck did it get down to Antarctica?  Yeah. So it's it's it's.  
**[0:40:58-0:40:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:40:58):**  They're not spraying weeds down there.  No, no.  Guarantee it.  No, it's not.  And so we just, you know, in China, I don't know how many billions of gallons of that stuff they make.  
**[0:41:07-0:41:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:41:07):**  But, you know, it's just that and Mother Nature.  Adjust for itself, you know, we we got Roundup resistant weed.  We kept spraying, you know, the soybeans, the corn, the Falfa and they're back to back.  And all of a sudden the weeds go, you know what, I'm just going to change my biology and all this.  And then they're resistant and then they you know, the system got abused.  
**[0:41:29-0:41:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:41:29):**  And they're super bugs, super weeds.  Yeah.  And, you know, we've done the antibiotics with humans, too, and overdone it and to where, you know, people got MRSA or they got staph and they can't bite it because, you know.  They don't have anything to throw at it.  They can't throw anything at it because.  
**[0:41:42-0:41:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:41:42):**  Nature's smart.  Nature, you know, it is.  And so the bottom line is we've got to work with Mother Nature.  You know, we got to do it holistically, naturally.  And so and it can be done.  
**[0:41:53-0:41:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:41:53):**  And I see huge, like I say, technology changes coming in the next five years.  It's going to make this thing very appealing for young kids that want to get back in.  Yeah.  Yeah.  And a huge opportunity from a business perspective.  
**[0:42:07-0:42:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:42:07):**  I think when you're trying to do the right thing and you're trying to be altruistic with your business, there's a certain segment of people that love to roll their eyes and kind of be like, OK, have fun with that.  That's not that's not legitimate business.  Yeah.  It's for good business.  But when you think about it purely from an economic standpoint and a business opportunity standpoint, when you look at what's coming at us like that, this is an undeniably opportunity for people.  
**[0:42:34-0:42:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:42:34):**  Yeah.  That will be very viable and will probably help support thousands of families in America to make a living making the world a better place.  Absolutely.  To me, that's like super hopeful.  No, I agree with you.  
**[0:42:46-0:42:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:42:46):**  I think it's super cool.  So I just am appreciative that you've taken the time to hang with me today.  Yeah.  Always fun.  Tim's a riot.  
**[0:42:55-0:43:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:42:55):**  If you ever have a chance to pop in and and meet him in person or see the farm, the farm is absolutely spectacular.  I'm very lucky to have gotten a pretty cool tour.  It's in a it's in a kind of an undiscovered part of Idaho as well.  So if you're ever in the area or look it up and enjoy that scenery online.  So, Tim, thanks for joining us.  
**[0:43:15-0:43:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:43:15):**  I really love it.  And I love your passion and I love what you're doing.  Thank you.  Well, thank you.  Thanks so much.  
**[0:43:22-0:43:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/6677eada#t=0:43:22):**  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry.  We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  Learn more about our work at Snacktivist Foods dot com.  