---
title: Drought Resistant Grains And The Future Of Food Part 2 With Dr Don Osborn
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

<script src="https://cdn.podlove.org/web-player/embed.js"></script>
    <script>
        document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function () {
          if (document.readyState === 'interactive' || document.readyState === 'complete') {
            podlovePlayer('#player', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative by Design/Drought-resistant-grains-and-the-future-of-food-part-2-with-dr-don-osborn.json', 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Thimm/thimm.github.io/main/podlove/podlove/Regenerative by Design/config.json').then(registerExternalEvents('player'))
          }
        })
  </script>

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-09-01)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Dr. Don Osborn  

**[0:00:00-0:00:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast,  where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore.  
**[0:00:13-0:00:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:00:13):**  I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities  behind the regenerative food system movement.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:00:26):**  Food is the connection between people and planet.  In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war  have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  
**[0:00:37-0:00:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:00:37):**  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design  can create a more resilient system.  
**[0:00:52-0:01:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:00:52):**  Okay, welcome everybody. Thank you for taking the time to join me  on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  Today we have a great guest. I am so excited to have Dr. Don Osborne joining us.  
**[0:01:03-0:01:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:01:03):**  Welcome, Don.  Hi, Joni. Glad to be here. Thanks for inviting me.  Yeah, this is great. We've been talking about doing this for quite some time.  
**[0:01:14-0:01:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:01:14):**  And for our listeners so that they understand a little bit more about us,  Dr. Osborne and I and another gentleman by the name of Jonathan Lendick.  Am I pronouncing that right?  
**[0:01:26-0:01:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:01:26):**  That's correct.  Yeah, so it's funny because I always talk to you guys on a first name basis  because we are the founders of an organization called North American Millets Alliance.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:01:37):**  And so, you know, Don, I know for today I'm going to refer to you just by your first name,  but you are Dr. Osborne.  So I want to make sure that our listeners do understand that you have a formidable academic background.  
**[0:01:50-0:02:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:01:50):**  And we're going to dig a little deeper into that during our conversation today.  So thanks for taking time out of your busy schedule.  Okay, my pleasure. Absolutely my pleasure.  
**[0:02:00-0:02:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:02:00):**  And please keep it on a first name basis.  Sometimes it feels a little funny, but...  A little formal.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:02:06):**  Yeah, that's great. Yeah.  So today we're going to talk about one of our favorite topics, which is a drought resistant grain called millet or millets in plural.  And we'll talk a little bit more about that nomenclature tension a little later in our conversation.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:02:22):**  But, you know, this is actually going to be part of a greater series that we're doing on the Regenerative Bide Design podcast that is titled Drought Resistant Grains and the Future of Food.  And so we've also had John Manuel with Dryland Genetics on the show before whom you're also acquainted with.  And we have some other people who will be joining us too.  
**[0:02:41-0:03:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:02:41):**  We've had Chef Pierre on the show as well.  And so I love that eventually, you know, as we build out the series and it has a little bit more of a presence, we'll have a whole section of it dedicated to this topic alone, which is really exciting because it's so important.  So go ahead and tell us, Don, where did you grow up and how did you get involved with what you ended up doing with your life's career, like through your academic studies?  
**[0:03:09-0:03:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:03:09):**  Okay, thanks. Yeah, it's a while back now, but I still remember.  Anyway, I grew up in the suburbs, basically, of New York and Philadelphia and Chicago.  And in summers, we would go to my grandfather was retired and bought a farm in northwest Connecticut, very picturesque country.  
**[0:03:30-0:03:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:03:30):**  And he had bought a dairy farm there and was doing dairy farming, which is really not very easy to do anymore in that region, unfortunately.  The economics of the dairy farming changed. But that was a unique sort of experience every summer.  And then I went to school undergrad in Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and was interested in international studies and possible career in foreign service or something like that.  
**[0:03:54-0:04:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:03:54):**  But through the course of my studies, I got more broadly interested in social science questions and specialized a little bit, though it's still with an international interest.  And ultimately, I went into the Peace Corps, a chance to expand my horizons and contribute, I thought.  But of course, I ended up learning a lot more through that experience or those experiences than you get out of it.  
**[0:04:19-0:04:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:04:19):**  It's sort of a truism of people who can be volunteers.  But I was...  What years?  
**[0:04:27-0:04:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:04:27):**  Don, just for a second, what years were you in your undergraduate studies?  I graduated, I got my BA in 78.  And then I did some other stuff actually on the West Coast. I was in Southern California for a little while and then went to Togo with the Peace Corps and then did some traveling through the Middle East and Europe and was checking out my options,  
**[0:04:49-0:05:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:04:49):**  considered graduate school and actually went back into the Peace Corps with the option of doing forestry and was in the Sahel.  So I pick up a lot of other things there in terms of observing agricultural and pastoral systems at the same time and then was in Guinea, in the Futa Jala Highlands, so three very different areas in West Africa.  Throughout which, since the theme of this is millet, so I'll mention that I first introduced to millet singular, oh, this is millet, it was pearl millet in Togo and then I ate a lot more of that in Mali.  
**[0:05:27-0:05:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:05:27):**  Actually a lot of different ways.  So there's very interesting details we could go into there later.  And I was interested also to Fonio in Southern Togo, in a traditional dish especially that's cooked with black-eyed peas, the egg poso of the Plateau region.  
**[0:05:48-0:06:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:05:48):**  Right.  And actually it's a toasted grain because they use a toasting process to de-hull it.  So it's very funny, later on when I was in New York, we were talking with Pogo Lees who were in Nia-Mase, they couldn't believe that the local people would pound their Fonio with sand to de-hull it.  
**[0:06:07-0:06:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:06:07):**  Mechanically that helps de-hull the grains rather than, you know, like that.  And then you have to get the sand out of there.  And if you don't pay attention, you've got sand in your millet, a little grain here and there.  
**[0:06:18-0:06:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:06:18):**  Oh, yeah.  That wouldn't be very nice.  And Chef Pierre did talk a little bit about the challenges with de-hulling in our session we had with him.  
**[0:06:27-0:06:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:06:27):**  And that's like a whole other conversation we should probably do like a panel discussion on, which is the challenges to value-added processing of these various millets around the world.  But, you know, back to that experience, I would imagine that being in West Africa in the late 70s would have been quite eye-opening, especially coming from the suburbs of New York and Philadelphia and Chicago.  Yeah, it was indeed a lot of changes.  
**[0:06:54-0:07:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:06:54):**  How was that?  Well, I mean, you can talk with any peaceful volunteer, you go through a lot of stuff, you say, wow, this is interesting. You say, oh, man, how am I going to get through this? What's going on here? And you're developing language skills and friendships and then familiarity with stuff.  And then pretty quickly, you're kind of an old hand after like, you know, a year and then new people come in and you're showing them the ropes.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:07:16):**  But in reality, you still don't understand a whole lot of stuff.  Yeah, right.  You think you know more than you do at some point.  
**[0:07:23-0:08:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:07:23):**  But the people in those regions were really amazingly friendly and forgiving of all ones of full power.  And it's a great experience with a lot of physical and challenges sometimes, you know, when you get ill from eating something that you might not have taken care to watch about.  Yeah, so that kind of introduced me to the whole Millet sphere, but I didn't think a whole lot about it. I came back and did graduate studies in something called resource development, which is a combination of environmental studies and community development in the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources.  
**[0:08:03-0:08:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:08:03):**  So there was various courses I did there and I also at the same time worked on a lexicon for Fofolde Lang, which was a very interesting process. I'd been learning that language and I kept keeping notes and was able to do something with that.  So it was very kind of a diverse process.  Interesting.  
**[0:08:21-0:09:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:08:21):**  So I mean, then I worked internationally in various capacities and developments and then was very interested in the language and technology aspect when people talked about how the internet was going to revolutionize African agriculture.  I don't know if you remember back then around the dot com boom era, there's all these kind of things. I was in Mali at the time that some of that happened back in Mali. I was looking at it and thinking, what are they thinking? You bring a computer with French on it in front of a farmer and he's not really going to see the point of it and not going to understand a lot of it anyway.  So how to build language capacities into the technologies that are being pervaded and still are, still a struggle and behind that the whole language and development.  
**[0:09:07-0:10:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:09:07):**  Yeah, it's such an important point because when you look at the challenges of resource development, technology and access to food, you know, commerce opportunities, etcetera, language is, you know, in the developing world, a constant struggle because not all languages have what is needed to be translated into the language that's on a smartphone, for instance.  And I actually just had a really fascinating conversation with someone who's working on that, trying to help make languages be able to be translatable on iPhones and people, I think, in the United States really underestimate how big of a deal that is.  Because when you're trying to access business and you speak a language that doesn't translate into something that is usable on a smartphone, it's suddenly a significant barrier. So we could have a whole another session just dedicated to that.  
**[0:10:05-0:10:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:10:05):**  But I love that you are aware of the barriers of language and this leads us to a lot of our topics on millets and just some of the challenges that millets and other drought resistant small cereals and unknown grains face when they try to enter global markets.  One of them, and I think it's one of the topics that you and I first talked about, was the lexicon surrounding millets and how millets are in the United States usually just referred to as millet.  There's only one of them and it's usually assumed to be proso, which is one of many, many, you know, just one of a huge body of plant species that are generally referred to as millets.  
**[0:10:47-0:11:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:10:47):**  I would love for you to just take a second and talk about your experience in Africa and how the vernacular around millets and food, you know, has really shaped the way you look at things today.  Yeah, thanks. Some people think I'm a linguist, given some of my work, I really not. I've had a little bit of coursework in that, but it's been interesting to look at things from that point of view.  People are very clear what they're referring to when they're growing it and they're obviously in very specific varieties of pearl millet, for instance,  
**[0:11:18-0:12:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:11:18):**  but which farmers will know and recognize and use in certain circumstances because of their season length and growth characteristics and so on.  Farmers anywhere have a wealth of knowledge on these things and those are language based. But I think where I start to see some of the issues internationally now is that when we talk about a lot of the documentation is in dominant languages like English,  which again shapes some of the thinking for better or worse in other languages. And one of the issues we have in English is that singular word millet comes to stand for a lot of diverse things.  
**[0:12:04-0:12:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:12:04):**  I could come up with a number of examples of articles where they're kind of confusing millets, saying that the millet domesticated in China 5,000 years ago actually is what came, you know, eventually was disseminated down into Africa.  And that's not at all the case. Pearl millet was domesticated in different species, but it was domesticated in Africa separately. So I think the linguistic, that kind of sapper war sort of thing, a weak sapper war theory for those people familiar with that whole discussion, which we won't get into, but it does shape the thinking.  So that's why I insist on the plurals as much as possible. I would suggest that during the year, international year of millets, which is coming up next year, that the press and people writing about it, try to angle it to use the plural as much as possible.  
**[0:12:52-0:13:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:12:52):**  Not millets is a grain, but millets are grains. And then you can get down to specifics and say this one is very high in calcium. That one has extremely drought tolerant characteristics and so on.  Once you get into the details, it really gets interesting. It's like a family, if you will, or a team. Everyone has its own strengths and weaknesses and together they present a whole array of resources to use that are sustainable and fit into regenerative farming and then dealing with, you know, drought conditions or less availability of water and so on.  Yeah, it's such a good point and I think it can't be overstated. And I'd love for our listeners to really take this away after our conversation that, you know, there is this entire group of cereals or like grain crops that are, you know, really kind of have a confusing existence when it comes to, you know, the English recognition because of the word millet.  
**[0:13:52-0:14:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:13:52):**  And that it, you know, when you do look at the impact of food, global food systems and bringing back biodiversity to our farming landscapes, they as a group play a huge role because of their adaptability.  But not all of them are, you know, set up for drought resistant, you know, cultivation like prosos certainly is, sorghums certainly are.  And I think that some of these other millets do lend themselves more to higher humidity environments. And I think, again, that just lends to the confusion.  
**[0:14:24-0:14:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:14:24):**  So, you know, Don, I know that we're kind of going down this train, but real quick, I do want you to lean in a little bit about what you did for your PhD studies and what you focused on when you went back and finished up your schooling.  Yeah, that was very interested in systems and I still am, how things work together. So that, I mean, language being a part of that a lot of times in development studies, people kind of separate that out.  And ultimately when I did my dissertation, that language was not a focus.  
**[0:14:54-0:15:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:14:54):**  I used terms in there. I mean, I explained how terms were used, which is important in understanding where the mindsets of people were, but it's really looking at herder farmer relations and the whole dynamics around that in the, in this unusual region in central Mali called the inland Niger Delta.  It's basically where the Niger River overflows. It's very shallow. There's an annual flooding system. So the Niger and the Bani rivers, which come from the direction of Guinea and Ivory Coast respectively, kind of join in that area.  And when the rains upriver kind of fill the river up, that all kind of converges down there and spread out and it allows rice cultivation and some areas are too deep for rice, indigenous and African rice.  
**[0:15:38-0:16:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:15:38):**  And areas become very excellent for grazing during the dry season when the waters go down.  But there's a set of regimes of how people from different ethnic groups, actually with different languages, but they, they are interacting historically over the ages, how they coordinate those movements of herds in and out.  The benefits of having cattle on certain kinds of land during the off season. So it's very interesting understanding those systems and how those are changing in the face of what was already climate change of the shore there.  
**[0:16:13-0:16:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:16:13):**  Yeah.  From the river, the lower. So when the river levels lower, the whole dynamic of the region changes when there's not as much water, not as much water coming up.  Yeah.  
**[0:16:22-0:16:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:16:22):**  So they change it how it, but that's basically what I was looking at there.  Right. Water is such a driver to climate.  Yeah, I would imagine that would be reshaping the entire agricultural and, you know, animal husbandry system of that region.  
**[0:16:36-0:16:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:16:36):**  That's what I did on that. So as you can probably tell, I'm in a lot of different areas.  Yeah, it's interesting.  I never really focused on it at all, but I'll tell you a funny story if you want one. When I first came back and I was in East Lansing for graduate studies, I went to a local food co-op and I saw a bin with millet in it.  
**[0:16:57-0:17:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:16:57):**  And I said, oh, okay, great. I haven't had that in a while. So I took some out and it didn't look quite the same and I cooked it up and it didn't taste quite the same.  Well, it was a proso millet. So it's not at all like a pearl millet. It tasted different if you know the two. I mean, they're both good in their own way, but they're just different.  And I didn't really think a whole lot more about it until later. And then I was through marriage associated with Chinese culture and food culture, which is amazing discussion.  
**[0:17:24-0:18:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:17:24):**  But when the millet's used there, they also use proso millet, but especially foxtail millet, shao mee in a lot of things. And then I was in East Africa later on and encountered the finger millet in a beverage called buchera, a non-alcoholic malted beverage, which I really like.  I think I have a great potential as sort of a natural energy drink here. It's malted grade. Actually they use finger millet and shaorga in it. And there are companies that can it and they export it, but on very tiny quantities.  But it was later on, I kind of stumbled into an Indian food market, which was really well stocked. And then they found, oh, here's pearl millet. I couldn't find all these years in the US.  
**[0:18:07-0:18:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:18:07):**  Now here's all this other stuff, you know, finger millet and stuff like that. So I began to pay real attention to how things were labeled and marketed like seven years ago.  So within the international year of millets came up in the proposal from India, which was the first proposal was in 2018.  I was watching that space. And when it was declared in 2021 by the UN General Assembly that 2023 will be the international year of millets.  
**[0:18:34-0:19:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:18:34):**  I started talking with people and you happily were among them to begin to try to do something in North America to highlight these grains and their potential here because it's North America is very different than Asia or Africa.  We don't blow millets that much except as forage or cover crops, sometimes for wildlife. There's a variety of species of millets that are used, quite a variety, actually about six or so different millets, half a dozen that are used.  So the dozen, I think we should say we talked about the whole group is about a dozen cultivated millets, although there are a bunch of minor ones.  
**[0:19:09-0:19:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:19:09):**  So the number might push like 18 or something like that. They're cultivated here or there. But anyway, the other ones grow here.  Almost all of them are not for human food. Some are for bird food and others for agricultural uses.  And then only proso and then teff, which is considered a millet as well from the Horn of Africa that is also grown for food, mostly in the West.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:19:36):**  Right. Yeah. And also for animal feed purposes as well.  And it's interesting how, you know, in my in my work with Snacktivist, because I do have a reputation of making human grade food out of millets, both teff and proso.  And we're interested in developing foods from other lesser known millets as well.  
**[0:19:58-0:20:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:19:58):**  We just don't have the foundation of value added processing and the agricultural foundations really established here yet.  But, you know, in talking to some other people who are involved in regenerative agriculture, like Dr. Alan Williams with Understanding Egg,  he said he has a number of farmers that are growing foxtail and a number of other millets and they want to grow more.  
**[0:20:22-0:20:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:20:22):**  And they would love to have a value stream for, you know, human grade food because they would they're just literally like either letting the cattle out on it afterwards or just cutting it and using it as as a cover crop with a little bit of a  as a cover crop without any real consumption of the seed head, like they don't even let it really fully mature.  And but they would love to. And really the issue that they're up against is that there's no domestic processing and no domestic market for it, which is unfortunate.  
**[0:20:50-0:21:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:20:50):**  When you look at the nutritional profile of, say, foxtail, the millets in general have fantastic nutritional profiles.  But when you look at them in terms of what our typical carbohydrate consumption is in our country, which lends itself to a high incidence of metabolic syndrome like diabetes and other diet related diseases,  if we were to shift our domestic diet to including more millets, it could actually make a significant impact on our, you know, diabetic management or other diet related disease management.  
**[0:21:21-0:21:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:21:21):**  And that's something that I think we need to take a very serious look at as a nation.  Yeah, I agree. Yeah, there's so much potential here. These are grains which were very ancient and I use archaeologists to realize how important they were now for a long time.  They were discounting that. Yeah, they were. But they fell out of it because they're a little harder to process. You don't get quite as big a visual return as you do with so many other grains.  
**[0:21:51-0:22:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:21:51):**  And certainly once we get to the green revolution time, you can do a whole lot with fertilizers, with some of these crops, rice and wheat and corn.  And I suppose barley as well. But you can do a lot with those with fertilizers and millets that really be experimenting.  And the work with that hasn't been that promising thus far, although things are developing.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:22:12):**  I mean, there's probably much more going on with the various millets that I'm aware of. I'm trying to follow through many things.  But yeah, the consumer thing you mentioned, I think it's so key. How do you get people interested in this? Because there's small grains.  It's a little bit out of our experience to eat something so small and little if you cook it like rice. I think you yourself have experience with combining a little bit of millet with rice and cook them together.  
**[0:22:40-0:23:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:22:40):**  And that makes a nutritional boost there. You can work those things, flour into a lot of different stuff.  Foxtail actually, size-wise, I think could be an interesting option for a Moroccan couscous kind of dish.  You can just steam those up and then it's almost the same size and they have a really interesting nutritional profile.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:23:06):**  Not that you have to do away with the wheat-based ones, but it would be a nice option.  Actually, the flavor is good too.  It is good. And here's another thing that as far as couscous goes, we talked with Chef Pierre about this, the whole thing between Morocco and Senegal who had the first couscous.  
**[0:23:22-0:23:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:23:22):**  But that actually is a thing that the African, West Africans have been cooking couscous for a long time, but with different grains, not with wheat.  They'd use bonio or cracked millet. And I guess you'd do cracked sorghum, you'd do, you don't do cracked corn.  And that's come into the diets too. So you're steaming up the cracked grains and eating with the plus.  
**[0:23:45-0:24:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:23:45):**  It's really delicious, but it's a different taste.  You know, it's like if you have pearl millet couscous or corn couscous, it's different than Moroccan couscous or something that you have with foxtail.  So this variety, is that kind of variety something consumers really want or can handle or is it something that becomes something simple?  
**[0:24:03-0:24:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:24:03):**  I don't know. The options are out there, the possibilities are out there. How to bring those into a popular vernacular, if you will.  Yeah. Well, it's like we've got to warm people up to it a little bit because the American palate is so engineered for like pasty, flavorless, white flour products.  It's just like we're trained for it. Even in wheat, I mean, historically, ancient wheats have more of a yellow hue.  
**[0:24:33-0:25:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:24:33):**  They have a richer, nuttier flavor. And even wheat has been bred to really deliver this very flavorless, nutritionless kind of pasty white starch.  And which is unfortunate because it's kind of trained people away from appreciating the nuances of what a whole grain food can deliver from a flavor, nutrition and overall experience, you know, kind of level.  It's just really kind of dumbed down our palate, which is too bad. So, you know, we do have a lot of work to do.  
**[0:25:06-0:25:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:25:06):**  And that's why I generally mix it with like a basmati rice so that way people can go, oh, I love this. I've never had anything like this.  How can I have this again? So we've often looked into, you know, creating some products so we can introduce people to these new flavors and experiences through something that they find a little more familiar, which rice is a really familiar food for most people in the United States.  Yeah. I mean, that's it. So I think some thinking has to be done there. Maybe some popularization during the year is really the opportunity to do that.  
**[0:25:39-0:25:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:25:39):**  I think that's certainly what you and I and Jonathan and others that we've been talking with have been working on is how, what kind of angle to do that.  Is it webinars? Well, that hits the intellectual side. Is it kind of a conference? Well, that could be a lot of exchanging information.  Could it be some kind of cooking videos or something like that? Well, that could be of interest to some people.  
**[0:25:59-0:26:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:25:59):**  So I don't know. Is it a pull for a press or are there particular points of pressure points, if you will, or the gem analogy, places that you can hit the gym where it's actually everything opens up.  But what those are, I think that's something we're still trying to figure out. We'll be talking with.  That's the big question. I'm glad you brought up cooking education because I think that that is such a huge deal.  
**[0:26:24-0:26:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:26:24):**  And hopefully with UN Near the Millets next year, we can get the attention of more chefs.  And, you know, I'm going to be presenting at a trade show just next month and it's going to be focused on college and university cafeterias.  And it's going to be fascinating. I'm actually putting together a survey for the chefs and the directors of food service who will be attending that show to try to kind of evaluate where they're at as far as their knowledge of alternative grains.  
**[0:26:53-0:27:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:26:53):**  I mean, everyone knows quinoa at this point. I think quinoa has done a very good job and we can learn a lot from how that's penetrated the markets.  But it'll be fascinating to talk to them because they're catering to younger people. And, you know, you look at college kids, they're more exploratory.  They want to try new things and definitely very concerned with climate resiliency and food systems.  
**[0:27:15-0:27:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:27:15):**  So that'll be fun. But, you know, honestly, Don, I think right now it'd be really great for us to talk about what millet and why we've founded NAMA, which is North American Millets Alliance.  Why we are passionate enough about this group of cereal crops to actually create a foundation to raise awareness.  Can you tell us a little bit about the founding of NAMA and how that all went down?  
**[0:27:39-0:28:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:27:39):**  Well, it kind of emerged organically. Maybe that's appropriate. I mean, Jonathan and I know each other for a long time from both having been at MSU and PhD programs and in the SCORE staff later in our careers.  And so I just brought the topic up with him and say, hey, you know, you've worked with one or another millet over the years.  What do you think? And maybe you could do something in this region to popularize millet.  
**[0:28:06-0:28:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:28:06):**  So we kind of grew out of that. And then you and I kind of met fortuitously. Was it on LinkedIn or something?  Yeah, I think it was on LinkedIn.  It carried on that conversation and kind of grew it in there. And I know there's other people who've been talking about individually and so on that have been productive along the way.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:28:23):**  But so we just basically needing to start with something in some ways and maybe a little bit of a stone soup sort of process, whether I should admit that or not.  So you start with what you can and that's how to build in with other people. There's a lot of activity out there, as you know, very well.  And you learn all the stuff about what you're from you about what you're encountering. But, you know, as far as artisanal grains, local milling, as far as different kinds of movements.  
**[0:28:53-0:29:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:28:53):**  So of course, the major issues are how farmers with farms and large investments in those and are living to make off of them are trying to figure out how to adapt to less availability or pricier water and how to do something.  So there's just a whole lot of thinking and almost a call to the ebullient space very quietly.  Nobody is realizing this, but there's just all the work that's being done with proso millet, for instance, in the plains as a potential grain, a potential item in chicken feed.  
**[0:29:26-0:29:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:29:26):**  I haven't heard the interview with John that well, but I'm sure he mentioned that just by feeding chickens with proso millet instead of corn.  You could save huge amounts of water on the birds themselves and the eggs they lay. Huge and immeasurable in terms of river flows.  It is not a small issue.  
**[0:29:46-0:30:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:29:46):**  It's a huge issue. I mean, when you look at the aquifer and river water availability right now, I think John told us it was something and, you know, he can chime in and correct, but it was something significant, like 16 or 18 gallons per egg of water saving.  When you switch to a proso based feed away from a corn based feed.  That really doesn't need irrigation.  
**[0:30:11-0:30:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:30:11):**  I mean, millets, I mean, it's like anything that you give them irrigation, they might do a little better, but even if you irrigate, you don't do very much.  It's not as demanding as corn.  So it's just adapted in different situations.  
**[0:30:22-0:30:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:30:22):**  And farmers realize this.  And I think planners and ag planners, people in these different spheres realize these things. So behind the scenes, I think there might be a lot of shifts to millets in some ways.  How that works in terms of like human food, in terms of integrating millets into stuff.  
**[0:30:38-0:30:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:30:38):**  In all kinds of experiments in Mexico, there was experiments of putting 10% foxtail millet in tortillas and people liked it.  I mean, it wasn't, it didn't change the quality in any negative way.  But it was more nutritious than the flour tortillas before.  
**[0:30:54-0:31:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:30:54):**  So anyway, there's a lot of different angles behind the scenes.  But then in the front end, how do you really get people interested in that?  And maybe these kind of heritage food sort of things, or just kind of or some way of popularizing this is a different taste experience.  
**[0:31:10-0:31:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:31:10):**  Or like I said, the beverage, the Buchera, the Ugandan Buchera beverage, which is non-alcoholic, the piece of it you can drink it in.  It's like, you know.  Yeah, the drink space is hot too right now. People are really open minded as far as exploring new types of drinks.  
**[0:31:28-0:31:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:31:28):**  I mean, look at the non-dairy milk aisle. It's really crazy what's happening over there.  So I think that's a huge opportunity to get new and novel things in front of people.  But, you know, we've talked about this a lot, like the whole heritage and, you know, like old ways as a foundation and the Whole Grains Council, they've done fantastic work.  
**[0:31:49-0:32:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:31:49):**  But I really think where people are at is like they're thinking about the future.  Like what is the food of the future?  And you and I know and, you know, as many of our colleagues do, is that a lot of the secrets of how we can create a better future lie in the past and deep in history.  
**[0:32:07-0:32:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:32:07):**  And it's that ancient grains modern table concept.  But I think really what resonates with people is futuristic thinking.  That's why people love technology and Elon Musk and, you know, climate change is going to be some technology play.  
**[0:32:20-0:32:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:32:20):**  And no, really. And it's probably going to be a nature based solution.  If you really want to know, it's not as it's not as fancy and tech and futuristic, but nature based solutions and things like millets and old heritage grains really are the future.  Like, how do we make them futuristic and sexy? That's the key.  
**[0:32:40-0:32:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:32:40):**  And so I don't know. Like, I know we've talked a lot about this with Jonathan, like and and like with millets, it's like millets are the future.  Like, let's really put a future focus on it.  Yeah, I mean, they're really in the jazz space. They're there. They're the past and the distant past and the future.  
**[0:32:58-0:33:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:32:58):**  Yeah, I think they're definitely there. But here's a here's a phrase.  I forget who came up with this. It might have been Joanna Kane Potaka or one of her colleagues.  No, it wasn't Tapas Tonderoi. I forget somebody was writing and they put the future of food is many, not more.  
**[0:33:15-0:33:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:33:15):**  Now, I don't usually like these all these alternative. Usually there's a life is more complicated than black and white.  It's this or it's that. But but the whole idea of the future of food as many I think addresses a lot of things.  That's a great diet in terms of ag that leads to different different circumstances for planning that that are changing as we speak in terms of even issues like overall global supply, like the Russian invasion of Ukraine and all that's happening with meat supplies.  
**[0:33:43-0:34:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:33:43):**  If you're producing a lot of different things in different places, the overall supply.  So the future of food is many can also mean more.  But I think that that action might be a good one, whether it's catchy or not. I put it might be a good one just to play.  
**[0:34:01-0:34:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:34:01):**  I think that's awesome. And in fact, I'll reach out to Tapas and Joanna and try to figure out who who we can credit with that statement, because I'm putting together a keynote for a conference.  It's going to be next month here. Artists. It's an artisan grains conference. And this is so central to the theme. It's like biodiversity and resiliency and that many not just more is really, really sums it up.  Honestly, like that's that's really fantastic. I'm going to reach out to them and and find out who I can credit for that at this speech in July.  
**[0:34:33-0:35:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:34:33):**  So I think that, you know, with the Millets Alliance, our NAMA group, that that also does play into what we're talking about there as well, where millets, plural, have such a strength because of the biodiversity and that they've not really been tampered with from a really intensive agronomic perspective.  So there's, you know, unfortunately, we've experienced a lot of biodiversity loss in the millets. I mean, there were thousands of little land race varieties at one point scattered throughout the world.  And luckily, people like Tapas, Chandra Roy, are out there trying to preserve that germplasm that's out there in the very far remote corners of India and trying to document that and to preserve it in seed banks so that we don't lose that genetic variety.  
**[0:35:24-0:36:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:35:24):**  Because that is likely going to be what is our greatest strength moving into the future of food security for the planet is that biodiversity piece.  You're right. I think that's very much a case. Well, I can tell you another quick story that I heard. I wasn't part of this process, but FAO had a series of seed fairs in northern Mali before the year 2000.  And this is after a series of droughts and so on. They brought farmers together and they showed off what they were growing and so on. And surprisingly, there were farmers from some villages that were seeing great varieties of pearl millet that they hadn't seen in years, they thought were lost.  
**[0:36:01-0:36:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:36:01):**  They were being grown in villages not all that far away, but they just didn't know and then they knew that.  Part of it, the idea of preserving gene plasm is very important, is essential, but I think the systemic aspect of in-situ conservation, if you will, if you're able somehow to keep the farming systems reliable so that farmers can keep these things going  and they don't become bought by major seed companies and not accessible except by a commercial aspect or basically competed out by less cost seeds for certain varieties, not others.  
**[0:36:39-0:37:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:36:39):**  If you somehow find a way to keep those varieties available where they're useful and they're used, that was, I think, another part of the equation.  Yeah, definitely. It's interesting to look at the value of that biodiversity and keeping that obtainable cost of seeds down.  It's such a big deal globally, especially. And, you know, a lot of times I don't want to get political with the whole GMO thing.  
**[0:37:10-0:37:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:37:10):**  But one of the things that we often don't recognize in the GMO versus non-GMO world is one of the big drivers is cost and access to seeds.  And when you look at the cost of genetically proprietary, you know, seeds, it's prohibitive in developing nations.  And we've created these farming systems that are so reliant on very expensive inputs, both fertilizers and proprietary seeds that it costs out many farmers in many parts of the world.  
**[0:37:40-0:38:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:37:40):**  And even American farmers are starting to feel that pressure now where they're like, we can't afford these inputs. We can't afford these seeds.  It's another argument to really advocate for these crops that are kind of lost or forgotten small cereals that are affordable.  They don't need the expensive chemical inputs. They don't need expensive irrigation.  
**[0:38:01-0:38:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:38:01):**  They may not produce the same yields that you would get with like a, you know, like a Roundup Ready corn.  But in the long term, if you look at the cost of what it costs to produce a, you know, 100 acres of millet that didn't need an extensive irrigation, extensive fertilizers, extensive X, Y, Z.  Well, you're creating something that didn't need thousands of dollars of inputs that we don't calculate into the end cost of that crop, if you see what I mean there.  
**[0:38:31-0:38:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:38:31):**  It's like the cost calculations we've used haven't brought in the entire picture.  It's like they're too productionistic and only looking at one type of yield and it's calories, you know.  But the cost of those calories is often high from an environmental standpoint.  
**[0:38:48-0:39:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:38:48):**  You're absolutely right. But all those things really in a good model, all those things should be brought in.  But yeah, I think you're right. Probably it isn't as much as it should.  But yeah, it's tremendously, as I say, a brilliant space.  
**[0:39:00-0:39:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:39:00):**  There's a lot of potential here. The issue with some of the millets is the production is not that high.  Although there's work on that, you know, in terms of breeding and the appropriate fertilizer applications in some cases, which really in some cases,  farmers are farming on very poor soil. So your pearl millet will produce something, but it's not necessarily, there's a whole lot there than nothing.  
**[0:39:26-0:39:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:39:26):**  Like how can you maybe find a way that's environmentally sound and to be able to increase those yields?  Because I hear a lot of farmers are saying, oh, can you get me some fertilizer?  Well, you know, what exactly is your issue? What are you looking for?  
**[0:39:43-0:39:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:39:43):**  You know, the yeah, so there's a lot of issues involved, but this is going to be talking about them a lot more.  It's complex.  Time to plug NAMA for a second.  
**[0:39:56-0:40:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:39:56):**  Yeah, please.  We'll come back to that earlier.  Just the whole idea that the North American Millets Alliance is really trying to bring together people thinking about millets, particularly in North America.  
**[0:40:06-0:40:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:40:06):**  And the whole concept really is to complement the International Year of Millets, which will naturally be focusing a lot more on the main millets growing regions.  And where sometimes the farmers have stopped cultivating millets and how to bring those back because they're nutritionally so good and environmentally sound to grow.  But North America is kind of unique in some ways.  
**[0:40:28-0:40:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:40:28):**  A lot of what we do, we will see more millets grown in North America. I'm going to do that to certain. And we will see more consumed by people, even if marginally from diverse sources.  I think that's what the future is saying.  But really being able to bring people together who are working on these things in different angles and share information and strategies and build on what we have and work on and see how those work with international markets.  
**[0:40:57-0:41:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:40:57):**  If people are eating more different millets in the US, that means it's good for farmers here.  It's good for their own health.  But also means that some of those farmers in Asia and Africa, for instance, can export.  
**[0:41:11-0:41:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:41:11):**  Because there's a lot of millets in India or even in West Africa, for instance, aren't really grown here.  Or even in China, like a foxtail.  Hardly anybody who's growing foxtail for grain here.  
**[0:41:27-0:41:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:41:27):**  But the Chinese market, people who are cooking Chinese in North America would buy their foxtail millet imported from China.  So you just have a complex and multidimensional.  But if we can increase communication. So NAMA is kind of, increase communications, we can maybe do more together.  
**[0:41:46-0:42:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:41:46):**  But NAMA has kind of been described by one of our correspondents, if you get who it was now, as a sort of a neutral party.  Which I think is something that's overarching and trying to bring people together, not advocating for a particular product or a particular region within the area, but trying to advance the process for everybody.  Yeah, absolutely. Which is so important.  
**[0:42:09-0:42:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:42:09):**  So, you know, and I like that you brought up this whole creating that consumer poll that can support farmers globally who are growing millets.  Because like we just described in many parts of the world, they're one of the only crops that really is, you know, doable.  You know, like with the poor soil or lack of access to irrigation, minimal access to fertilizers, they can't compete on a commodity market.  
**[0:42:37-0:43:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:42:37):**  But they can compete in a specialty market. And if we can create more consumer demand for these types of grains, it could be revolutionizing to some of these communities.  Like what has been demonstrated with quinoa. And we've learned a lot from quinoa because there were some very detrimental sourcing practices and very detrimental agricultural practices that were happening in the Andes when quinoa really spiked in its popularity.  But we've learned a lot about how to create a beneficial, both from a social perspective, but also from an environmental perspective of how do we create fair trade type processes to bring these into the broader global markets.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:43:17):**  And now what we're finding is, you know, what in my conversations with Sergio De Nunez, or De Arco, we'll bring him onto the show at some point as well, too.  I keep trying to get him on for the fall, but he worked a lot in Bolivia and in the Altiplano with, you know, the quinoa harvesting there starting, I think, in the late 90s even.  And what they've found and they have studies to show that the household per capita income was literally like 10 to 20 X.  
**[0:43:48-0:44:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:43:48):**  It's something significant because of the quinoa projects and that because of that global demand for quinoa, they were able to secure education for those families that had been historically living at a very, very impoverished level for decades.  And so, you know, when you look at the power of creating a new consumer demand for a crop, it can revolutionize parts of the world that desperately need capital.  You know, I mean, it's really a positive.  
**[0:44:21-0:44:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:44:21):**  I guess there's some concern that the families themselves aren't eating as much of the quinoa.  I'm not sure where that is, but.  Yeah, that was a huge concern.  
**[0:44:28-0:44:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:44:28):**  Yeah. And I think that they've been able to help, like, fix that in a lot of the areas where they recognize like, uh oh.  They also recognize that when they were forcing the quinoa to have too high of yields and they weren't using regenerative farming methods, that quinoa actually stopped being a complete protein, which was always one of the selling points of quinoa.  And when they started mass producing it and forcing that extractive model, it actually harmed the nutritional profile of the quinoa.  
**[0:44:59-0:45:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:44:59):**  And now they've actually had to really try to work to fix that as well.  So there's a lot we can learn from the quinoa experience and hopefully we can prevent that same problem from happening around the world with millets as well.  Indeed. Yeah, good point.  
**[0:45:17-0:45:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:45:17):**  I just add on the asterisk there that the quinoa, amaranth, and buckwheat are not millet.  Sometimes you'll see them describe this millet. They're small grain. They're very healthy. They're good for you.  They're part of the picture. I eat, uh, actually all of them at one point or another during that course of the year.  
**[0:45:33-0:45:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:45:33):**  But they're not technically millets. So we're really talking about grass species that are in the wheat, rice, corn, barley.  Those are all grass species.  Monocots.  
**[0:45:47-0:45:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:45:47):**  Yeah, they're grown as monocots, but they can be.  Sorry, monocots. It's interesting.  Monocots.  
**[0:45:53-0:46:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:45:53):**  Yeah, like with the quinoa and amaranth and buckwheat, they are broadleaf. Like they're not grasses.  And I'm glad that you brought that up because there is often a lot of confusion because they're all kind of lumped into this big, broader group.  But you're right. They're not grasses.  
**[0:46:07-0:46:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:46:07):**  Yeah, they're smaller. They must be millet.  Yeah, exactly. So, um, I love how we're just working together to create more awareness for millets in the world and for our health and for the environment.  So before we wrap things up, Don, because I know you're so passionate about the lexicon, what work is NAMA doing to help streamline the definitions for the various millets?  
**[0:46:35-0:46:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:46:35):**  Like we just discussed, there's often confusion with amaranth and buckwheat and quinoa and beyond.  You know, do we have any plans to try to do an education to really try to help people understand the difference between these different crops?  Yeah, good question. I mean, I could easily see it being a webinar, but that's not going to solve a problem by itself by any stretch.  
**[0:46:59-0:47:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:46:59):**  I think a lot of it begins with the plural aspect, as simple as that sounds, because once you, because the thing is with millet, linguistically, the singular form also doubles as a mass noun or a collective noun, if you will, standing for a bunch of stuff.  Like furniture, furniture is a mass noun, you don't have to say furniture, I suppose you could, but millet is one that can also hold a plural.  But as long as you use a singular form, a lot of people are going to hear a singular thing.  
**[0:47:32-0:48:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:47:32):**  So getting the dynamic and not only in English and many other languages, getting to be able to use a plural already signals that there's something else going on.  That's one key step. As far as nomenclature, you'll see that heft and phono and sorghum, sorghum is sometimes considered millet, sometimes not.  We don't need to get into it, but assuming it's part of it, they have their own name. They're like millets with their own name, so their identity is secure.  
**[0:48:05-0:48:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:48:05):**  People think, oh, they see it on the shelf, Bob's Red Mill or somebody else, you know, phono, they see yolel or Atacora or one of these other branches.  They know phono, but something. But pearl millet, what is that? What's the difference between foxtail millet and finger millet?  Should, in the same vein, we speak of canola oil rather than rapeseed oil. There's more than just a renaming involved.  
**[0:48:36-0:49:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:48:36):**  There's a different breeding process that led to it and so on. But you, canola is a consumer friendly name. It's something that you can remember.  It has an identity that it gives the particular oil, which is different than the original rapeseed, a common name.  So, yeah, is that possible? For instance, finger millet is, we hear finger millet, which is the one that's very high in calcium and that they make the buchara from in Uganda.  
**[0:49:07-0:49:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:49:07):**  But you'll hear it often referred to as the Indian name, the common in several Indian languages of Ragi.  Would marketing it as Ragi, could that take off as far as that particular millet?  Oh, yes, it happens to be finger millet, but we call it Ragi. And then that takes off.  
**[0:49:26-0:50:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:49:26):**  So where would you borrow the names from and how would that work? That might be something in the longer term, but that's going to take a lot of discussion, especially where the markets or the habits are in a particular direction.  Right. Every call it pro-show millet, simply millet. That's pretty much, I wouldn't say it's indelible, but it's sort of embedded in the marketplace right now.  People say millet or you see it in the store shelf and then you're thinking that one thing it happens to be pro-show. In the U.S. it's always pro-show.  
**[0:50:01-0:50:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:50:01):**  Yeah, it just really plays into the need for the brand identity of all these different millets to be developed. And then you look at like champagne versus sparkling wine.  Is there going to be some sort of regional intellectual property? Like if you did go with the Indian name, is there some sort of stake to that name that would prevent people from taking it and using it in other parts of the world?  So it does get rather complex really, really quickly. So for everyone who's listening, if you want to continue to learn about how we're solving these big issues, you know, definitely make sure that you go to the North American Millets Alliance web page and sign up so that you get our newsletters and follow us on LinkedIn and on social media so that you can learn more about what we're doing.  
**[0:50:53-0:51:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:50:53):**  I mean, we are a very small, brand new organization, not heavily funded or backed by big organizations that have lots of resources.  Yeah, exactly. Right now it's just funded on nothing, just air. So, you know, it's just from the passion of people who want to get this done and see that millets are the future and could hold a lot of solutions to major problems we face as a world.  As we, you know, just navigate a changing planet and a changing climate and a growing population. So, you know, as we wrap this up, what are some of the action items that people could do?  
**[0:51:30-0:52:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:51:30):**  Like if they're listening to this and they're all charged up about millets and they're like, oh, my gosh, I want to do something. Where should they start? Other than buying one of our millet sampler boxes that will eventually have available, what could they do?  Yeah, I suppose that it begins with what you're saying is try some out in different ways. And then if you really want to be more adventuresome, you can go to markets that sell Asian or Indian foods and you'll find a lot of millet there.  If you really want to take a tour, typically they'll have a number of different things. And you might have to ask them what it is. If it says ragi, that's a finger millet. If it says bajra, it's going to be pearl millet.  
**[0:52:16-0:53:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:52:16):**  But sometimes they're flowers. You could bring them in and build them into something. Pef also works very well as a flower in some baked goods.  Or even in markets that are selling Chinese foods, they're going to have usually two millets there, the xiaomi and the proso. But the xiaomi is the real little one. They're smaller than proso.  And that can be cooked as sort of a couscous sort of thing or blended into stews and so on. So yeah, I think that would be a way to educate yourself. In terms of action, beyond that, the average consumer, I think that asks if you wanted to have something that's not there.  
**[0:53:02-0:53:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:53:02):**  And I've talked with some local markets about, well, okay, could you carry this? There's actually a teff-based granola produced by the only farm growing teff that's a grain in Michigan.  And I just asked a couple of stores locally, hey, can you stock this? So you can also do that if you see something online.  Yeah. Ask your supermarkets, ask your retailers, especially if you shop at like a cool independent health food store, like that is a great request because I think that needs to happen everywhere.  
**[0:53:32-0:54:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:53:32):**  I really urge consumers to say, where are the things that are regenerative? Where are the climate friendly crop products like, you know, millets and teffs and sorghums?  I think consumers could really shape a whole new world if they started requesting more of those things. So, yeah, teff granola. I'm going to have to order some of that and try it because I'm excited to check that out.  Don, one last question I want to ask you before we wrap it up, like with all of this stuff and you've lived around the world and you've had a very fascinating life, what gives you hope for the future?  
**[0:54:10-0:54:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:54:10):**  Well, peace and prosperity and unity are the big hopes. Yeah, I think a lot of the best things in life come as processes.  So that would be, you know, as I get older, that's what I'd like to see is there's some progress working in positive directions for, you know, living together in harmony and then enjoying life and food is part of enjoying life and sharing those things together.  There's a lot we can learn from each other. Keeping those things in mind, you know, among some areas, I guess people are pulling in opposite directions.  
**[0:54:55-0:55:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:54:55):**  But really the ultimate benefit to humanity is, you know, not homogenizing the world into one thing. Nobody's really talking about that.  But being able to have a share our diversities in ways that are respectful and that help us all, you know, just like in trade, trade benefits everybody economically well.  So the same thing when you exchange ideas and viewpoints and so on.  
**[0:55:21-0:55:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:55:21):**  Absolutely. That's a good point. Thank you for sharing that with us. That definitely gives me hope, too.  So for our listeners who want to learn more, we will make sure that we put a link to NAMA and some more information so you can connect with Dr. Osborne on LinkedIn or elsewhere.  Is that a good place if someone wants to reach out to you and further this conversation offline? Is that the best way for them to reach you, Don?  
**[0:55:49-0:56:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:55:49):**  Yeah, yeah, that is. We'll talk about other links as well. There's the NAMA actually does have a web presence, although it's very minimal at the moment with something bigger.  So those links can go on the show notes and that would be very helpful.  Yeah, we'll do that. We'll do that because, you know, we are like we've mentioned, we're ramping up to go into this. You and you're the millets next year.  
**[0:56:10-0:56:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:56:10):**  So we are really, really busy. If anybody feels passionate about this and wants to volunteer and help, we are definitely looking for more people to get behind the movement and to help, you know, just create this vision of the world that we see together.  So, Don, thanks for joining me today. It's always a pleasure. And I'm glad we got this done. Yeah, we'll get this published.  Yeah, look forward to that and look forward to our next NAMA meeting and take care.  
**[0:56:41-0:57:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:56:41):**  Yeah, that's awesome. And, you know, for those of you out there, if this made you excited, please take a moment to share this podcast. Leave a review, leave a rating.  But most importantly, just make sure that you share it with other people who have similar passions and want to learn and let's regenerate. Thanks so much.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast. If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  
**[0:57:16-0:57:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/020d361c#t=0:57:16):**  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry. We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  Learn more about our work at snacktivistfoods.com  