---
title: Food At The Crosshairs Of Agriculture Politics Business And Human Health
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-11-03)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Lisa Stokke  

**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:00:26):**  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  
**[0:00:52-0:00:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:00:52):**  Okay, hello everybody, and thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  And today we have a guest that I've been, again, wanting to have on for the longest time, and we've been trying to coordinate our schedules.  I have Lisa Stocky, and did I pronounce that right?  
**[0:01:10-0:01:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:01:10):**  I was actually going to say that I'm glad that you pronounced it in the old Norse way.  Okay, well we'll just roll this.  I'm finding that I'm one of those people that I just kind of interpret it and then I run with it, and I need to be better about double checking with people.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:01:27):**  But you and I are Norwegian, so hey, that works.  Right?  Yeah, and this is great. So welcome, Lisa. I'm so glad you could join us today. Lots to talk about.  
**[0:01:37-0:01:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:01:37):**  Yeah, thank you, Joni. Yeah, it was, you know, you and I were recently able to get together face to face.  Yeah, I guess that was just last week.  It was. Over the best meal I've had in years, and the best company, I mean, I'm really lucky in that I get to talk to amazing and interesting, educated people all the time.  
**[0:01:56-0:02:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:01:56):**  But I have to say that dinner was just one of the most fantastic highlights of the year so far, so thank you.  Yeah, yeah, wasn't it? Yeah, no, thank you.  Yes, fantastic.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:02:07):**  So today, I mean, there's so many things to talk to you about because you are like such a legacy maker in the whole world of food advocacy and organics and transparency in the food system.  And I was thinking about what our focus should be today. I mean, you and I are both moms too, so we have this different, like I've noticed, like with moms involved in regenerative and food advocacy, there is a slightly different flavor.  It's like that mom heart that's totally, you know, not going to back down because we're protecting our future generations.  
**[0:02:39-0:02:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:02:39):**  And I think it's a very unique angle into regenerative advocacy and food system advocacy.  So I thought today we could make our focus kind of like food, which is really at the crosshairs of agriculture, politics, business and human health.  I mean, it's right there in the middle.  
**[0:02:53-0:03:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:02:53):**  And you are what I consider to be the original, one of the original snacktivists, which is why I love that word.  Yeah, I do. I love that too. I really took that as a compliment when I saw that in your show notes for me.  Yeah, nice. Yeah, no problem.  
**[0:03:11-0:03:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:03:11):**  So I would love for our guests today, you know, they may not be familiar with the work that you've done,  but I remember stumbling across your work as, you know, involved in food advocacy at a grassroots level here in Alaska and in northern Idaho.  Your work with Food Democracy Now years ago, years ago, and it's just so fun to meet the people behind the movement.  
**[0:03:34-0:03:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:03:34):**  And I think that makes it extra special.  And for those of our listeners who aren't familiar with your background and, you know, being born and raised in Iowa,  I would love for you to just back up to where you grew up and what your experiences were and what was the path that led you to where we are today.  
**[0:03:54-0:04:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:03:54):**  Yeah, thank you. I admit I still struggle with telling that with brevity, but I always try to.  And this will just be another opportunity, I guess, to practice that with some efficiency.  But as you noted, I grew up in Iowa.  
**[0:04:16-0:04:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:04:16):**  I was born and raised, born in a little town called Forest City where they make, you know, something people have heard of probably Winnebagos, you know.  Oh, yeah. Yeah, that's American icon.  Exactly.  
**[0:04:32-0:04:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:04:32):**  And both of my parents come from farming backgrounds.  My dad a little bit more removed, but a couple generations back, you know, if you look, they were farmers and artisans.  My mother specifically grew up on a farm.  
**[0:04:47-0:04:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:04:47):**  She was a farm girl, oldest of seven kids on a working farm.  And so I had a lot of opportunities to go out to my grandparents' home.  And they, you know, they essentially were not very financially well off.  
**[0:05:04-0:05:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:05:04):**  And the house and the barn and everything were always in shambles, even though they really worked very hard.  And they had kind of the traditional farm, you know, Old McDonald's farm.  They had pigs and cows and chickens and geese and, you know, crops and, you know, they did it.  
**[0:05:21-0:05:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:05:21):**  They did everything. They did dairy. They did meat. They did, you know.  Wow. Yeah.  Not very much of that anymore around.  
**[0:05:28-0:05:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:05:28):**  And that's really a very unique lifestyle that kind of had a, not to sound terminal, but like an extinction period over the last 50 years.  Absolutely.  You just don't see that anymore in the United States.  
**[0:05:41-0:05:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:05:41):**  Yeah, that's totally true.  And I watched, I didn't realize that that's what I was observing, you know, was that process of that flourishing and that way of life to that extinction.  But then on the other side of my family, on my father's side, I had, it was kind of like a Rich Dad, Poor Dad situation where I watched his family, my aunt and my uncle, go the opposite direction with what was being fostered at that time.  
**[0:06:13-0:06:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:06:13):**  You know, through, you know, what we understand now as being, you know, Earl Butts style policy in agriculture at the USDA of that, you know, basically the model of get bigger, get out.  And so they got big and I don't even know how many acres they had.  But as a child, I watched them rip down the old farmhouse that they, that my cousins and them grew up in, build a very big home, you know, with, you know, two kitchens and it was like the best play area.  
**[0:06:45-0:06:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:06:45):**  As a kid have big, huge combines and millions of dollars worth of equipment, whatever.  Right.  And that was, that was kind of the backdrop for my childhood with regard to, I guess, my food activism.  
**[0:06:58-0:07:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:06:58):**  And I didn't really realize until many years later that that was my observation as a kid.  And I, of course, didn't really have a lot of opinions on it and I didn't know what was causing it.  But then as I got older and I began, you know, I kind of began my journey with food, mostly through being an environmentalist, being somebody who's always been, you know, wanted to have a connection with earth and nature as a child.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:07:34):**  And then seeing in as a young adult or becoming to understand how our food system impacted our environment.  And so I became just rather in my mind, logically, that, okay, well, I don't want to support a system with my dollars going to that.  And so I began to seek out organic food. And at that time, I had to drive all the way down to Iowa City, which is about a three or four hour drive for me.  
**[0:08:10-0:08:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:08:10):**  Wow.  Go to the new Pioneer Food Co-op. I did that when I was 19, 20, 21, whatever.  And then when I began to have children, which I did rather early when I was 22, I had my first child of four.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:08:26):**  I was like, oh, gosh, then I began to understand all of the issues with the food itself. Right.  And just a lot of the toxins and whatever that were associated there in.  And so I had to really figure out how I was going to feed my child in this, you know, the irony of the food desert that I was in in Iowa.  
**[0:08:47-0:08:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:08:47):**  Right. Which is ironic.  I mean, it's the bread basket of America.  Yeah, it's a food desert. Like to me, that's always been such a fascinating paradox.  
**[0:08:57-0:09:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:08:57):**  Yeah. It's a real tragedy for Iowa and Iowans in my experience.  Right.  And I used to have to drive two hours one way up to Minneapolis to the co-ops up there primarily to the wedge co-op.  
**[0:09:10-0:09:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:09:10):**  A lot of people are familiar with the wedge. It's still there and thriving, I believe.  And I was really grateful for that opportunity. But yet as I got on and had, you know, more children and I also came to realize that even though, you know, they started to go to school.  And despite my efforts to feed them to the best of my ability and really turning that into a lifestyle, having to drive down to Ames, Iowa, an hour and a half away to that co-op, drive up to Minneapolis for that co-op and bring back food.  
**[0:09:41-0:09:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:09:41):**  And then I would witness all of the poisons going into our air and water and soil where we physically lived.  And I knew there was no way that that was not impacting my kids plus the school food and whatever.  And so that was when I just, you know, in my mind, I was like, there's no democracy here.  
**[0:10:03-0:10:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:10:03):**  You know, I don't have a say so.  And so that was where the vision of food democracy, you know, came up for me. And then I joined with another fellow Iowan who came up with the concept of now.  We want it now. And so that was the democracy.  
**[0:10:21-0:10:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:10:21):**  Yeah.  And we just kind of, you know, it's really it's kind of a big and long story, which I don't really need to go into here, but, you know, we began to petition, you know, the Obama administration and the candidates.  You know, we launched the Food and Family Farm Presidential Summit in 2007 and put these issues in front of, you know, farmers wanting to produce good food in front of these candidates.  
**[0:10:50-0:10:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:10:50):**  Nice.  And we just kind of took off from there.  And we took off fast, if I recall. I mean, I did. Yeah. I just feel like it was out of left field and just kind of took off like wildfire in these groups of people who are focused on healthy eating and reducing the toxin load in our farm and food systems.  
**[0:11:12-0:11:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:11:12):**  And it's a small community, especially back then. I think it was smaller, but I feel like the work that you did there really helped to elevate the conversation around why, you know, healthy access to organic and healthy foods is not just a, hey, that's your choice.  If you can afford it, great.  And I think that's actually, there is a huge democracy issue or an equity issue because really it should be available to everybody. I mean, you shouldn't have to spend more to consume less toxicity in your food.  
**[0:11:45-0:11:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:11:45):**  Like it's a weird economic paradigm that we're living in where the more processed and heavily fortified and heavily sprayed, etc. it is, the cheaper it is, which from an economic standpoint makes no sense.  That's where politics and, you know, subsidies and all that stuff get in. So I love that you've worked in that space because I find food policy and all of that to be very daunting. Like it's actually a space I don't usually touch a whole lot.  It's not my wheelhouse. I find it intimidating.  
**[0:12:16-0:12:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:12:16):**  I also find it sometimes very discouraging because sometimes you find that somebody that you admire or you thought really stood for something or a brand that you really loved and then you dig down deep and you're like, wait a minute, you're not actually doing what you say you're trying to do.  It's actually like a ruse or greenwashing or whatever you want to call it. And that's a hard emotional thing to swallow.  Yeah, yeah, it is. I echo everything that you said. And it's been a while since I have engaged in what a lot of people, a lot of people called our work tip of the spear work.  
**[0:12:55-0:13:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:12:55):**  You know, because we did launch a number of, you know, I guess actions, if you will, initiated a number of things that were made a lot of people uncomfortable, you know, that were making the rules.  And I guess I made the decision, you know, probably like five, five years ago when I did kind of my last work like that, which I guess I can't say that I'm not ever going to like push back and anything again.  You know, you and I both came in through that, you know, Viking lineage. It's kind of in our brain.  
**[0:13:28-0:13:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:13:28):**  But yeah, funny how that works.  Right. But, you know, I guess I had to really take a step back, you know, kind of the last thing that I'm referring to is, is pushing back on the allowance of hydroponics and an organic organic certification.  And I launched a campaign through my organization next seven in 2017 called protect organic. And I did it with many of the foundational farmers of organic in the US.  
**[0:14:02-0:14:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:14:02):**  And, you know, I just I saw that like yet again, even though we had dozens of farmers actually fly into the meeting and Jacksonville, Florida, and I organized a number of, you know, organic companies or, you know, and including Patagonia, which is, of course, an organic company, but I helped to spearhead that with Rose McCario, rather, she really helped me to spearhead that.  And Bronner's and whatever, and then they organized a lot of these really good organic companies to stand with us on that. And even though we had those enforcements, which is why I'm bringing that up, is showing up at the meeting saying this is what organic is organic is in the soil, you actually look at the organic farming, or the organic food production act rather. And you see that it says soil, you know, you have to produce Yeah, this isn't a soil.  Soil focused system. Yeah, it's a soil based system.  
**[0:15:03-0:15:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:15:03):**  We lost, you know, but and the funny thing is, is that we had a lot of the, you know, I guess, foundational organic institutions against us in that, and associations and certifiers. And you notice I'm like, being careful to not mention any names. Sure. If if you were to ask me offline, I would tell you, but  I would be careful with that for sure.  You know, that was the surprising thing, I think, so a lot of people that these, you know, organic institutions were actively working against us to now not be on the side of organic because it's better for people in planet. But instead, it's really good for our bottom line. And so, you know, the growth through finances has become, you know, the the north, at least from USDA certifications.  
**[0:16:06-0:16:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:16:06):**  Right, I mean, and you do look at the financial growth of the organic sector in the last 20 years, and it's just been at a sustained KGAR rate, like compound annual growth rate, which is Yeah, definitely attracting money because they want that the returns associated with it, but not necessarily concerned with what the triple bottom line is when you grow organic as an industry, like you have people, planet and profit all the time.  And if you eliminate the first two peas, and you're only focused on the profit, you're not going to have a holistic model.  That's very well said, I 1000% agree with that. And the, you know, the one thing that I would also like to stress with that, because I realize it's kind of a deviation from this conversation is organic. But sadly, that's like kind of the best that people a lot of people can do, right, is just find organic certified. And so I think that it's important for people to understand, as they're doing their shopping, and they're purchasing, you know, for themselves,  
**[0:17:14-0:17:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:17:14):**  and their families, especially if they're seeking it for, you know, health purposes, is to know that one, what has facilitated that growth, one of one of the factors that has been key in facilitating that growth is the watering down of the standards. Right. And so it's not that all of these companies, some of them have, of course, but I'm not saying that across the board, but many of these companies didn't scale up to meet the standards.  Yeah, instead went to the meetings to lobby, they lobbied numerous meals, and they would go their hat in hand saying, you know, please let us have carrageenan because we really need organic gummy bears. And we really need to have, you know, smooth organic chocolate pudding, you know, yeah. And then that's kind of how, you know, the process goes and it gets degraded. You know, people, people are always shocked when I tell them that when we were advocating on the hydroponic end,  advocating on the hydroponic issue at several meetings, organic, you know, national organic centers board meetings, that it would be like Scott's miracle girl. They're saying what? Yeah, yeah, that's crazy. Yeah. Wow. Because they were producing or wanting to produce at scale, the products that they could, you know, get on the Omri list that could be used in hydroponic production, and then have it be called organic.  
**[0:18:40-0:19:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:18:40):**  And there's a lot of problems with that. And I could totally go into that. But people say, well, if we're gonna have hydroponic, don't we want it organic? And it's like, well, the way to really look at that is not so much that you don't want chemicals in your hydroponic. First is to ask yourself is hydroponic, nutritious and good for me. Second thing is what is the impact on that on organic farmers because they can't compete economically. It's a vertical integration.  This is my policy person coming out. But yeah, it's a vertical integration of the vegetable and food supply. You know, they vertically integrated meat and dairy, chicken, you know, chicken, poultry, all of these things. And I advocated on these issues in 2009, the antitrust USDA DOJ hearings. And now the hydroponic is a means to vertically integrate vegetables and fruit. So now they don't really have they don't really need farmers anymore. They just need, you know,  That's an interesting angle. I never thought about it from this angle. You're kind of blowing my mind right now.  
**[0:19:41-0:20:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:19:41):**  Yeah, yeah. And so, you know, that's the direction that the industrial food supply is heading. And so for me, I'm kind of like, and you were kind of going in this other direction to say, well, how can we more deeply connect with nature, you know, to provide our nourishment and our sustenance? And that's, I think, behind the regenerative movement, right?  Mm hmm. Which is like a very nature based solution.  Yeah.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:20:09):**  You know, movement. And yeah, there is this divergence, for sure, where it is the industrial path versus the nature based solution path, which are both scalable. I mean, I think there's often a lot of confusion about whether the nature based solution ones are scalable. They certainly are.  And, you know, even, you know, just coming off of a recording with Ray Arcaletta yesterday and how he came from very conventional agricultural background, and was through the process of studying for generations, like for decades, studying organic systems and biological systems.  Biology is the center of the universe for our planet. And when you remove that, you know, from being the center, you get a dysfunctional broken system. And no matter how you want to candy code it, no matter what certifications you give it or whatever.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:21:03):**  Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And like for me personally, I think that there are some good use case scenarios for hydroponics and densely populated areas where they have major food issues, like accessing fresh foods.  And there's no land because it's all developed like densely populated high rise environments, etc. Like where they have rooftop systems. But, you know, if you're setting up an actual food system where you have one faction competing against the other faction, I haven't ever thought about it like that. That can be really dangerous.  Yeah, I mean, it's kind of a slow drip, you know. And, you know, that's my major concern, I guess, if I have a concern with hydroponic systems. I saw an article the other day, I think it was in Civilly, it's talking about, you know, hydroponic systems in schools.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:21:58):**  And, you know, my, my concern with that is, you know, showing that to our next generations as a means for food production, you know, as a mainstay or as like, right. You know, when I was a kid, we used to go out to the farms.  Right. Yeah. And there was a lot of kids, of course, in my generation that didn't grow up with grandparents and farms or parents like I did.  And, you know, of course, in Iowa, we had a lot of farms and you, it really did open your eyes. It's like, oh, my gosh, that, you know, like Fred Kirschenman, who's, you know, I have a deep amount of respect for.  
**[0:22:43-0:22:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:22:43):**  He's my board president and a longtime friend and mentor to me. He used to be president of Stone Barns, and he used to say that we would have kids come out.  And they would be like, you know, there's dirt on that carrot. You know, why is how do they get dirty?  And I think for him, as you know, he's been a farmer his entire life with a little stint, not a stint, but a period where he was a professor and then he went back to the farm, inverted it to organic and biodynamic.  
**[0:23:18-0:23:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:23:18):**  He has an amazing story for anyone who doesn't know it. My Father's Garden is a beautiful film that was made about his life and his journey.  Yeah, I'd love to see that. We'll have to put that in the show notes. For me and for our listeners, it's always fun to find something that's a joy to watch and inspiring and educational at the same time.  Yes. Yeah. And that's what this story, that's what the story is. My Father's Garden.  
**[0:23:46-0:23:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:23:46):**  And so, you know, I think as a farmer, that was a little bit eye opening for him to realize that these future generations had deviated so far. Right.  And so that is that's that's sort of my concern with hydroponic systems, you know, is that we that we do realize that it is a it is an addendum.  It's not it's not just biology. It's kind of biology. I used to build hydroponic systems for a company called Earth Juice in the late 90s.  
**[0:24:16-0:24:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:24:16):**  And I had a botany degree and went out and got a job and I was preparing to go to the Amazon to do some really cool botany work.  And I had a few months and I'm like, oh, this will be a cool job. And it's all organic. And they had a specialty in organic hydroponics.  I was like, I want to learn about that. That's really fascinating. Granted, as it turns out, late 90s California building organic hydroponic systems, you can guess who the customers were.  
**[0:24:41-0:24:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:24:41):**  And then and then it got really weird because, like, you know, one of them would get in trouble with the law and suddenly they'd be following me.  Someone would be following me home to where I was living. And I'm like, OK, this is not what I said to do.  You know, and it's just but it's been really fascinating, like it kind of was foundational to my thinking about food systems and that whole bifurcation when you do go down the industrial captive biology system versus like intact, holistic biological systems that then become self-sustaining.  
**[0:25:16-0:25:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:25:16):**  I mean, you will never I mean, I was really fascinated by like tilapia farming and floating Aztec gardens and like that was kind of where my mind was going with hydroponics.  But that's not really where it's at. And it is a rough point that I don't think most people are aware of.  They just aren't deep enough in food system thinking to really see the difference. And like, you know, I just look at your work with Food Democracy Now and, you know, as far as like when you when you all founded it early on, like really what were some of the big goals that you set out to to accomplish with your organization or did it kind of unfold naturally and organically in response to like what the current events were?  
**[0:25:59-0:26:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:25:59):**  Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that's a good question. I used to I used to kind of call myself I'm not call myself but I used to think of myself as a minute man, you know, because I was in the industrialized.  I mean, Iowa began to feel more like a factory to me.  A lot of people don't realize is that we that in Iowa we at that time, I'm sure the statistics are different now because I've been gone from there for almost a decade, but it was like nine hogs to every human in the state of Iowa.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:26:32):**  And we were the largest egg laying state and the largest corn producing state. And I know that's still true because I actually just looked at that stat the other day.  And compared to like Illinois, Illinois and Iowa are the two largest but Iowa is still far than Illinois. So by far and wide, we produce the most, I don't know, it's crops.  I'll say crops. It's not even I don't think of it as food really.  
**[0:26:57-0:26:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:26:57):**  Right.  You know, for this industrialized system, and yeah, you know, I so I kind of, you know, somebody looking for food for my kids, as I was saying earlier, I was, you know, I don't know, I guess beholden to be in that location after, you know, having children.  So I felt like that was the best thing for them, you know, with regard to family and place and yeah, either.  
**[0:27:26-0:27:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:27:26):**  Right.  And so I thought, Okay, I'm I kind of resigning myself to the fact that I need to be here for a little while longer. And so I think it was probably I don't know what year was I'm gonna guess 2005 or something.  I began to just do, you know, act act locally, I guess I used to have this bumper sticker on my, my, you know, Volkswagen that said, you know, think globally act locally.  
**[0:27:54-0:27:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:27:54):**  I love sticker.  Right.  I had one of those.  
**[0:27:59-0:28:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:27:59):**  Yeah, I was having a meeting this morning. And I'm noticing how I'm just I'm really coming back around full circle to that thinking, which is probably another conversation. But that's how I started was just in my own community, just introducing foods that were local and  hosting dinners. I remember you talking about these dinners.  Yeah, be mind opening to people.  
**[0:28:23-0:28:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:28:23):**  Yep, yep, they were they turned into a slow food group and I became a slow food leader. And I was really fortunate to be, you know, in a in a place and location and have people there. The Willis Willis family, Paul and Phyllis Willis, who Paul helped to start Nyman Ranch Pork Company, joined with Bill Hyman at that time.  And it was a means for farmers. It was, you know, producing, you know, better quality food, but also for farmers to be able to continue to keep their animals on land and pasture and not have to move into an industrialized confinement system, which was right, which was massive, especially at that time.  Yeah, supermassive. Yeah, and there are a lot of farmers that don't want to do that. And if they have a path to market that offers them an alternative, they are happy to pursue that. And it's not usually just a decision of money. I mean, they have to have like a channel so that it's profitable and viable from a business perspective and often more profitable and viable than the industrial way, which is usually squeezing every penny out of the value chain to maximize profits.  
**[0:29:35-0:30:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:29:35):**  And I'm interested to hear a little bit in your work, like talking to farmers, what what did you hear from your Iowa farmers that had really gone through that big go big go home? Iowa has been historically the hotbed of farmer suicides has the highest rate of farmer suicides of any state in the nation, even now. And that really started a trend up in the 90s.  Yeah. Yeah, it's um, yeah, it's a very predatory system, or it can be. There's no question about it. I had I watched that suffering with my grandfather, actually. Yeah, so I have a visceral experience of that.  So I, you know, I would say there's a lot of things that come to my mind when you ask about the starting of the democracy now and one of the people that was really pivotal in, in helping us to launch and encouraging us was Michael Pollan. And we were, you know, in close, you know, collaboration with Michael, he didn't, you know, he didn't really want to be called a founder, but I can, I can certainly point to his influence on the market.  
**[0:30:53-0:31:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:30:53):**  And I think that's what he has influenced. As we were writing these letters to the Obama administration asking for a Secretary of Agriculture with the background in sustainability. And that really struck a chord with people. And after we did launch that petition, and we garnered I think around 130,000 comments in like a week and a half.  Yeah, wildfire.  That's actually what launched our organization of what we've kind of been imagining. And, and after we did all this, and we very quickly went to meeting with the Secretary of Agriculture that was appointed, who was Tom Vilsack, who was our governor, who I can solidly say that he facilitated a lot of the industrialization of Iowa.  
**[0:31:37-0:31:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:31:37):**  As, as a senator, and as a governor in the 90s. That, you know, we could kind of see the writing on the wall over things were probably headed and we had a meeting with him, you know, and right after he took office, he didn't even have his, you know, staff together yet.  And, you know, after all of that whirlwind, you know, we kind of settled back and we're just like, you know, what are we to do now? And it was someone like Michael who said, You guys are from the belly of the beast, you have a really unique voice.  And you should probably stick around. I think it'd be great if you stuck around and created an organization. And, and we did and we had met people like, you know, the really wonderful women at Farm Aid. And we got our first check, if you will, to give us our start, signed by Willie Nelson.  
**[0:32:31-0:32:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:32:31):**  Wow. And it, it Yeah, we started out quite organically, if you will. Yeah. Yeah. And we were just, it didn't make sense at all. I remember we were really, you know, kind of like struggling for money, personally, and finding our footing. And I was like, Oh, my gosh, this is, you know, what are we doing? Why are we doing this again? Right.  And, and, you know, I remind people of that sometimes when I've spoken at conferences in the past and said, you know, I'm really just I'm a mom from Iowa. And I saw these issues, and I wanted to engage and I wanted to use my energy to to make a difference. And that hasn't changed for me. I am I my positioning as I go about it in a different way.  I work probably more on tuning into I guess I think of it as like a different frequency of, you know, building the new, you know, Bucky Fuller very eloquently encapsulated that, you know, in a very well known quote of, you know, to tuning into the new reality building the new, because it makes the old one obsolete.  
**[0:33:47-0:33:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:33:47):**  Right. And that's my favorite Buckminster Fuller quote, right? Yeah, because it's just makes so much sense.  Absolutely. And and I also believe as a student of quantum physics throughout my adult life, you know, all the time learning more and more about that through practice, if you will, as opposed to concept of, you know, what we focus on, we create more of.  And so I had to really ask myself that question as an activist of like, you know, am I an activist on the problem, which, you know, in physics terms is increasing or growing that problem?  
**[0:34:28-0:34:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:34:28):**  Right.  Through anger, fear, you know, whatever, we're focusing on what we think is the problem and thereby expanding it.  Right, rather than solution, solution focus.  
**[0:34:39-0:34:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:34:39):**  The solutions, the anecdotes, the awareness, the building, the using our divine spark as for creation, right?  And as opposed to being victims of a system.  And so that is a very important point right there, I have to say, because I totally agree with you. And I know some amazing activists that I see where their heart is, and I respect where they're coming from.  
**[0:35:10-0:35:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:35:10):**  But I agree that by just being so focused on the problem, but not offering a bridge to a solution, they kind of do get sucked into the quagmire of just Eddie being in an Eddie spinning around and around and never getting out of the problem.  And then the problem just gets bigger and bigger instead of going away.  Yes.  
**[0:35:29-0:35:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:35:29):**  Yep.  And yeah, and of course, through your work, you are obviously focusing on solutions.  You know, you've been you were you were ahead of me there, you know, while I was fighting, you were like creating the solutions.  
**[0:35:43-0:35:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:35:43):**  I just like I was like, gosh, you know what, like, I as a mom, too, I think that that's a powerful experience when you're sitting there and you're looking at what your kids are eating and what they want to eat.  And and then all the other kids and I'm like, I finally had this, like epiphany where I'm like, and it sounds horrible.  But I was like, I don't know if I can save my kids from this.  
**[0:36:04-0:36:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:36:04):**  But if I put my efforts into building a better system, maybe there's hope for all the grandkids out there, not just mine.  And there's this weird departure where instead of like being obsessed with what my kids are eating and what their exposures are, I was like, I'm going to just I'm going to have to like walk away from that a little bit and let let it be.  I mean, I've tried to instill them with the best decision making skills possible.  
**[0:36:30-0:36:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:36:30):**  But we do live in a world where the vast majority of food that's available is pretty darn toxic and contributing to a toxic system.  And I think I'm going to contribute more to the world by helping build a solution that hopefully will become a change maker in the broader system down the road with hopes that all of our grandkids and great grandkids will find natural foods to be the norm and processed Frankenstein's foods to be the exception, something for special occasion or not for concern.  consumption every day.  
**[0:37:02-0:37:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:37:02):**  Yeah, no, 1000%.  I'm right there. I'm right there with you.  Yeah, I'm right there with you.  
**[0:37:11-0:37:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:37:11):**  I've and I guess that's where the concept of next seven generations for me comes in.  I mean, obviously, it's not something that I, I own.  It's something that has been handed down to us through, you know, throughout humanity, right, that we that when we act and behave and create our, our daily actions and our policies, you know, of how we engage with the earth and, you know, create our societal systems, that we do it with a focus on future generations to their benefit.  
**[0:37:49-0:37:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:37:49):**  That we really won't go wrong if that's our if that's our north of benefit for future generations.  And of course, we see this as how it shows up in like epigenetics, right when we write the science of human human biology, right?  Oh, my goodness.  
**[0:38:04-0:38:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:38:04):**  Absolutely.  conversation about the microbiome the other night, right?  Yes.  
**[0:38:08-0:38:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:38:08):**  A fellow mom and, you know, medical researcher, right?  Yeah.  And we're finding evidence of that, of how important that is.  
**[0:38:16-0:38:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:38:16):**  And I used to think of my daughter.  I remember saying to her, and it was when we lived out in Massachusetts, and I would really was diving into this work with Bio nutrient Food Association.  And I looked, I looked at her and I and she was not at that age where she was thinking about having kids.  
**[0:38:37-0:38:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:38:37):**  But she was at biologically the age where she could write psychologically, she wasn't there, but biologically she was.  And I told her about, you know, I said, you know, the egg, your egg that will produce your child was inside of me.  And so what I ate, what I tuned into energetically, and, you know, my physical body, you know, I guess resonated at, and the food resonated at, you know, the information of the food that was going into my body.  
**[0:39:12-0:39:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:39:12):**  Is directly impacting your child.  Is now wild.  Right.  
**[0:39:19-0:39:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:39:19):**  And also I noted the other side of it that the year my daughter was born in 1996 was the year that genetically engineered soybean or genetically engineered crops were approved, you know, market food supply and all of that.  Yeah, and we changed all the allowable levels of glyphosate and others to accommodate that market shift.  Yep.  
**[0:39:41-0:39:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:39:41):**  And now we have an epidemic of food related allergies and all kinds of other things.  Is it a coincidence, right?  Not likely.  
**[0:39:49-0:39:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:39:49):**  Yeah.  And so I just, I kind of reminded her of that, that I said, as your peers start having children, you will probably start to see the impacts of these decisions, you know, that your parents made and are, and at a policy level was made, right?  That changed the agricultural landscape.  
**[0:40:10-0:40:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:40:10):**  Right.  Wow.  And so, and then therefore our food supply.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:40:15):**  And so as you noted, we're seeing the impacts of that now.  I honestly feel like this is partially why as women and as moms, there is a slightly different flavor to the like evangelical nature and dedication to making these regenerative systems work.  Because it's like, we all feel that inside of us, like, you know, that whole like, okay, that egg that made, you know, and then when it was, you know, that it crosses generations, it's not ours to own.  
**[0:40:48-0:40:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:40:48):**  It's like belongs to the future.  And I think that is a unique perspective that the women that I know that are in the regenerative movement have a different zeal and a different fire of like, I'll do this, I'll die, I'll die on the hill fighting because I'm not fighting for me.  I'm fighting for the future generations.  
**[0:41:08-0:41:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:41:08):**  Yeah, yeah.  Yeah.  And, you know, even for myself, you know, again, like you, I have no desire to disrespect anyone's work in that way.  
**[0:41:20-0:41:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:41:20):**  But I've, I've turned away from, I'm not turned away from, but I mean, I've mostly tried to just observe within myself that fighting energy and move that into that creator energy, right?  Yeah.  When I look at the planet, and I lean in in a very humble way, which I think the regenerative, you know, philosophy and movement is inviting us to do is to initiate that biomimicry, right?  
**[0:41:50-0:41:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:41:50):**  And the concept of biomimicry, of course, is not new.  But I believe that that's what we're called to do right now at this time, humanity, as we begin to rethink our societal systems, you know, of, you know, whether it be our economy, or our education or technology or design and how we live our lives, you know, within our homes and these boxes we've created, that we lean into nature.  And we look at what is how nature is showing us.  
**[0:42:24-0:42:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:42:24):**  Design thinking.  Yeah, design thinking.  Exactly.  
**[0:42:28-0:42:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:42:28):**  It's the regenerative by design experience where it's this new lens that we look through the world and we we build all of our layering that makes our world tick through regenerative lens, you know, that that basically plays into what your statement at Next Seven is where it's we are dedicated to shifting towards a society that coexists harmoniously with the natural world.  And with each other and where prosperity is sustainable and shared.  And that's a really important philosophy because it it's what sets the future generations up for success.  
**[0:43:03-0:43:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:43:03):**  And I just think on that note, it's fantastic.  And Lisa, I want to, you know, just in wrapping it up, because we're at the top of the hour.  What do you think the biggest action item is for people who are listening and people who want to help and want to contribute?  
**[0:43:20-0:43:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:43:20):**  They don't know what to do.  Maybe they have their own full time jobs and they're managing their families and all the other things that they're doing.  And they're like, what can I do to be a part of this?  
**[0:43:29-0:43:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:43:29):**  Maybe they're financially constrained and they're like, I don't feel like I can participate in organic because I can't afford it.  Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That's an important question.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:43:38):**  And, you know, I'll just briefly preface that by saying that, you know, that work for myself is expressing itself through my own organization, NEX7, and also through the BioNutrient Institute, of which we're a founder.  And the BioNutrient Institute seeks to, you know, I've, as I've had to dive into this with my co-founder, Dan Kitchage, the importance of the exploration of it.  And as we are asking ourselves these questions about the involvement and about the action, as you're saying.  
**[0:44:20-0:44:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:44:20):**  And I think for us, it's about shifting to a different paradigm of encouraging and inviting the exploration, inviting the conversation, inviting a different paradigm of thinking outside of labels, if you will.  Yeah.  And mechanistic paradigm of certification.  
**[0:44:48-0:45:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:44:48):**  And it isn't to criticize any of that specifically, but I see the process that we've come through with certification of organic and, you know, I don't know, whatever, whatever label you can think of that that was kind of the best we could do at the time.  And we see it as a continuum and as an iterative process that it's not an arrival state, but it's always this constant leaning in with curiosity and humility to nature and life and earth and the cosmos and what it has to teach us about, you know, nourishing ourselves and our lives.  And as we lean more into that and tune into that resonance and emulate that on an individual level and in our homes and even in our communities, we are introducing that to others around us to also, you know, tune into that space and to feed and nourish ourselves from that place, right?  
**[0:45:56-0:45:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:45:56):**  Right.  And so what we found from a scientific perspective with the BioNautry Institute is that these very deep knowings within us, if you will, through being biological connected beings is validated by what we've studied in the science.  That's where our food is most nourishing.  
**[0:46:22-0:46:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:46:22):**  It's not from a certification.  We didn't find any correlation with certification and higher nutrient levels.  It was from, like you said before, those tuning into biology as the predominant paradigm.  
**[0:46:35-0:46:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:46:35):**  Regeneration is a law of that biology.  Everything regenerates.  And when we eat our food in those natural regenerative systems, that's where the nutrition is.  
**[0:46:45-0:46:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:46:45):**  And it's really that simple.  We don't wish to overcomplicate it.  We want to simplify it.  
**[0:46:49-0:46:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:46:49):**  Yeah.  That's amazing.  Thank you for that, Lisa, because I think that also just gives people permission to enter this world just through thinking and through observation and that it's not something you have to show up for, like well-financed and with tons of time on your hand.  
**[0:47:05-0:47:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:47:05):**  It literally starts with a change of heart, which is amazing because that's something that most people can start with.  So I know our listeners are going to want to find more information about you.  If you could just briefly tell us, like, where can they find you?  
**[0:47:20-0:47:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:47:20):**  What's the best way to learn about your current work and how to reach you if they have questions?  Yeah, thank you.  My organizational website is next7.org.  
**[0:47:31-0:47:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:47:31):**  We are on the typical social media channels.  Hopefully by this time, we will also have more of a presence on a new social media channel called Vero, which I'm kind of inspired by because they don't pay attention to your algorithms and your data and advertise to you and all of that.  So I'm kind of inspired by that idea.  
**[0:47:51-0:47:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:47:51):**  So I invite people to check out Vero.  As far as social media goes, a lot of us know the issues with social media that are quickly emerging.  And then also through some of the stuff I just talked about with Bionutrient Institute, you know, our studies are on there.  
**[0:48:06-0:48:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:48:06):**  We talked about hydroponic.  Our hydroponic study is up there that we did through Next7.  And you can see what we found is the differences between soil-based, generative-based grown food versus hydroponic.  
**[0:48:20-0:48:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:48:20):**  We'll make sure to post those links.  So this has been fantastic.  I mean, Lisa, as usual, you and I can talk all day because we have always so much to unpack and get excited about the same things.  
**[0:48:30-0:48:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:48:30):**  And I just am grateful that you shared an hour of your day with us.  And, yeah, I'm just really grateful that we were able to take a deeper dive into your background and hear some cool stories that we can share with the world.  So thank you, listeners, for joining us today.  
**[0:48:46-0:48:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:48:46):**  Don't forget to rate if you're listening to this on a platform that can be rated and share with your friends so we can spread the word and get people inspired.  And, again, build those new bridges and focus on solutions so that we leave our kids a better world.  Thank you for listening and have a wonderful day.  
**[0:49:30-0:49:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/15039935#t=0:49:30):**  Thank you.  