---
title: Food System Security A Discussion With John Roulac
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-07-28)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & John Roulac  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast,  where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore.  I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities  
**[0:00:23-0:00:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:00:23):**  behind the regenerative food system movement.  Food is the connection between people and planet.  In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war  have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:00:44):**  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design  can create a more resilient system.  All right. Well, good morning everybody and thank you for joining us  on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  And today we have a guest that I'm very excited to have us joining  
**[0:01:04-0:01:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:01:04):**  to discuss some really big picture things that I am very, very keenly interested  in talking about today, especially in light of what's going on just globally  with supply chains and food systems and a lot of concern and a lot of learning is happening.  A lot of people who have never really thought about food system security  are thinking about it this week even more than they did during COVID.  
**[0:01:27-0:01:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:01:27):**  So it's not the most exciting topic in the world if you're not somebody who cares,  but it's a very important topic that I think everybody should be thinking about right now.  So welcome, John Rulack. Thanks for joining us.  Thanks for inviting me on the show today.  Yeah, you're welcome.  
**[0:01:46-0:01:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:01:46):**  Now you've had an exceptional background in the world of food.  I know a lot of people who are really passionate about food and food systems, farming,  but I don't know as many people who are as passionate as you are about the big picture  but have founded one of the most iconic brands in the CPG space of the last decade.  And if you're not familiar with John's story, he is the founder of Newtiva,  
**[0:02:07-0:02:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:02:07):**  which if you've ever shopped at a health food store or even Costco  or a number of stores that have anything healthy,  you have had one of his products.  So John, I was wondering if today to get started,  I think people would love to hear a little bit about your background.  
**[0:02:22-0:02:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:02:22):**  Like where did you come from? How did you get into the natural products industry?  And tell us a little bit about the story of founding Newtiva.  It had to have been quite a journey.  Yeah, well, yeah, I've always been interested in food.  I'll tell you a couple of little things.  
**[0:02:40-0:02:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:02:40):**  When I was younger, when I was maybe when I was six or seven,  whenever my mom would take me to the supermarket,  I would run over to the coconut section and grab a coconut and put it in the cart.  And then when I get home, chop it up and drink the milk.  And then later in my early 20s, I would go to the farmer's market  
**[0:03:05-0:03:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:03:05):**  and find back when you could bring in whole coconuts when you were allowed to do that.  And sprout them. And then I would grow coconut palms in my office when I was like in my early 20s.  That's cool.  Which kind of irony is then later I founded Newtiva in 1999, which means the nut of Sotiva.  Our first product was a hemp seed bar, which the government said was a couple years later was the same category as heroin.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:03:33):**  So we ended up suing the federal government because they wanted to both bankrupt me and put me in jail.  The Clinton administration and the Bush administration.  Wow. I'm glad you're mentioning this. I don't know the side of the story. Thank you.  Yeah. And we won that lawsuit in federal court in 2004.  Worked with many members of the of the. The hemp food sector, including Dr. Bronner's and Nature's Path.  
**[0:04:05-0:04:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:04:05):**  But then then in 2003, I decided to introduce coconut oil.  So and literally, you know, the the I look back and go, the fact that I was growing coconut palms in my office, you know, 20 years before that, I kind of chuckle at that.  Yeah. And so we're one of the one of the leading organic coconut oil companies in terms of a brand in North America.  And primarily I got introduced.  Nativa started that as a way to show there was a market for farmers in Canada growing hemp.  
**[0:04:46-0:04:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:04:46):**  So I'm a big fan of hemp. I've written several books on it.  And it's a it's a great rotation crop, though. It's that's extra hype, though.  And hemp won't always do as much as what some people think it can.  But it's an excellent seed for food, very nutritious and Omega threes protein, magnesium, zinc and iron.  And it also has you can make automobile parts and clothing and building materials.  
**[0:05:16-0:05:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:05:16):**  So it's a it's a versatile crop. Just there's a lot of challenges with the processing and the growing and scaling up, given it's been attacked for so long.  So that's a that's a little little background on the TV. And I stepped down as CEO four years ago.  So I was in the TV for for 18 or so years. And we had a very good run.  We grew it over 50 percent a year for over a decade and seven years in a row, Inc. magazine, fastest growing companies in the in the in the country.  Yeah, that's fantastic. Congratulations. It's always cool hearing a success story come out of CPG, especially when it's really leading edge and pushing people to think outside the box, which you guys certainly did in multiple ways.  
**[0:06:02-0:06:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:06:02):**  So it's really cool stuff. Now, where were you living during all of this? Did you grow up in the Bay Area?  I grew up in Pasadena, in Southern California. And so I started Nativa in Sebastopol in north of San Francisco and Northern California.  Then after a couple of years, I moved right after I started, I moved down to.  To Ventura County and Nativa was based there until 2012, until basically we kind of outgrew the county in terms of of trying to find the the where was going to be the best place, especially when you're fast growing.  And so the Bay Area just had a lot of access to good quality assurance managers and plant managers and good marketing people, finance people.  
**[0:07:01-0:07:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:07:01):**  So we moved to Richmond, California, which is which is six miles northeast of San Francisco.  And so we moved there in 2012 and that was that was a great location and that's where we where we really ended up growing.  That's good resources there, for sure. The Bay Area has a lot of real business support structure when it comes to like intellectual marketing, all of that stuff.  Yeah. Yeah. And there's a group called OSC2 that companies like Numi and Nativa and Dr. Bronner's and, you know, other YQI are members of.  And so there's a lot of good network there.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:07:48):**  Absolutely. It's that strength in numbers kind of concept when you're pioneering a whole new category in food.  And for those of you who are listening and haven't heard of OSC, I believe it's One Step Closer is the acronym, what it means.  And it's an organization dedicated to growing organic, as far as I understand, in the marketplace.  So great organization if you've never checked into that.  But, you know, as far as like, you know, your business trajectory, you think about going from, you know, putting some coconut oil on the market or hemp seeds in a bag.  
**[0:08:21-0:08:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:08:21):**  And then you look at scaling it at the degree that you guys have, which is like absolutely impressive.  Supply chain obviously became your baby. Like you had to have lived and breathed supply chain, especially when you're trying to do high quality supply chain.  I really love the fact that you guys have always taken a real strong stance on quality sourcing and ethical sourcing and then even taken it a step beyond that and looked into regenerative sourcing.  And if you could tell us a little bit about your learning curve on that and when you first really started thinking about regenerative in the way that we think of it now as far as agriculture.  Yeah, I would say that when I heard a presentation, let's say in 2013, 2014, about the role of regenerative agriculture in soil health and in the huge impacts of degenerative agriculture in climate, in greenhouse gas emissions.  
**[0:09:24-0:09:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:09:24):**  It's set her up. It all just kind of came together. Will Allen, who's a great farmer from Vermont that's been a leader in the organic and sustainable food industry for, you know, for for probably over over five decades now, six decades.  And what I was just blown away with was there was so little of a focus and the environmental movement, environmental community and the organic farming farmers about soil health or the reduction of agricultural chemical usage in addressing climate change.  And I was just really surprised that the, you know, the original pioneers, the hippie farmers, which would go every year to eco farm in Oselomor, California, which I started going to in my early 30s.  I was just surprised that there was not so much of a focus of that and no one was really talking about. And that's when I got the idea to do the film Kiss the Ground.  And that took about seven years to bring that together and met different people and filmmakers. And eventually, you know, that came out on Netflix about a year and a half ago.  
**[0:10:51-0:11:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:10:51):**  So that's a fantastic work. It's a work of art. John, I have to stop you for a second and just kind of digress for a minute on Kiss the Ground, because if you're listening to this podcast and you have not seen that film, I want you to stop and cue it on your phone so you don't forget to watch it tonight, because it is a really incredible, well done documentary type film and really puts the context of what regenerative agriculture is all about and the hope.  And the better picture of the future that it can hold for us in a very agnostic lens, I want to say. The first time I watched it, I watched it with my mom.  And my mom is an extremely smart person, grew up far, you know, we've always had farming roots and but very, very conservative by conviction.  And she literally about jumped off the couch and was like, yes, this is what needs to happen. This is the future.  And she was so motivated by it. And I just thought that was so cool that everybody I've ever told to watch that film said it literally changed the way they looked at things forever. So kudos to you.  
**[0:11:56-0:11:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:11:56):**  Yeah. Thank you.  And to reach across the spectrum of people and like make it meaningful. It's amazing. So please watch it.  And thanks to Josh and Rebecca, the filmmakers who really did the hard work, you know.  Yeah, it's really fantastic.  So, you know, you had this epiphany and it led you to wanting to create a film.  
**[0:12:21-0:12:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:12:21):**  That's a that's an interesting thing, because I think a lot of times when people feel like they encounter something, they have an epiphany of thinking and they're like, what do I do about this?  Most people don't go, let's launch a film.  So I think that that's an awesome way to champion a broader thought and a broader thinking process.  And, you know, as far as thinking about it before you actually launched the film and started getting the crew together, how many years went by?  It was seven years.  
**[0:12:49-0:12:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:12:49):**  OK, seven full years. OK.  That also puts it into perspective for all of us that are working to make change in the world is to put it in perspective of time passing great things.  Rome wasn't built in a day. Right.  So, yeah. So how did you put the people together that ended up being in the film?  It's a it's an interesting cast of people.  
**[0:13:12-0:13:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:13:12):**  Yeah, well, first I met the filmmakers and and.  And then we you know, we also that, you know, the name of the film is named after the NGO Kiss the Ground, you know, Rylan Finney.  And they were friends of mine. And so, you know, I had a sense of of who some of these who some of the stars should be.  And so did ground folks.  So and yeah, it was it just there and there was more people in the film.  
**[0:13:46-0:13:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:13:46):**  We just ended up cutting some out. And then and.  You know, irony, we had more we had more farmers and ranchers in it, but we ended up cutting out just because we weren't getting the interest.  So when we when we put some of the celebrities in like Tom Brady and Giselle, that's when Netflix like said, OK, yeah, we're interested.  Yeah. More is it's just what it is.  Yeah, it is. And I'm really glad that you guys were able to find people to pull pull that in because I think it does.  
**[0:14:22-0:14:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:14:22):**  It just opens people's interest to it who are outside of agriculture. And it is one of the things that is a little bit of an uphill battle right now with regenerative is that it is kind of like a community that preaches to itself a lot, which is obviously really important because we need more and more farmers.  But once you get outside of the regenerative ag side of the community, I feel like often there's a huge divide between what's happening in agriculture and happening in the regenerative world and like what's actually happening on the consumer facing side and like public awareness and that whole world.  So thank God for celebrities that are willing to get behind this.  Yeah, we need more of them.  Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. Interesting.  
**[0:15:05-0:15:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:15:05):**  There's a there's a Indian mystic named Sadhguru that has a soil save soil campaign.  And one of the one of the NGOs that I know and like decided to attack him because for whatever, and I want to get in all the details, but my feeling is that we speak at the World Economic Forum, which has its own issues and challenges and concerns about what kind of future they're advocating for.  But we need people at all in all walks of life to add to the soil health and regenerative agriculture.  You know, I don't I don't have to agree with them or even support much of what they're doing.  But if they're going to talk about soil health, that's what we need, because literally the solution is under our feet.  
**[0:15:56-0:16:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:15:56):**  And it's so it's so important with with the environmental crisis we face, you know, the climate, the climate intensity, you know, the lack of, you know, of of local supply chains and what's going on in Ukraine and Russia and all over the world, which we didn't get into.  So, yeah, we restore oil in our local communities, the best thing that we can do. And with that, you know, increases biodiversity with that increases animal health with that increases human health and a host of other things and reduces costs for health care, etc.  It's almost like the easiest, best solution in the world today to solve the most problems is the one the least one that every major environmental organization focuses on.  It's the it has the least focus of the climate movement, of agriculture, of federal governments, of the UN, you know, of the World Economic Forum, of the IMF.  You know, you just could go, you know, you know, of our universities.  
**[0:17:06-0:17:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:17:06):**  Yeah, absolutely.  That the solution to to what we face, we ignore at our own peril.  And it's one of the one of the kind of the bitter, bitter, you know, realities that we that all of us who are involved in this movement know it.  Yeah, we do.  The same time it up. We have hope because if you don't have hope, you know, you know, life is life is is rather dysfunctional.  
**[0:17:39-0:17:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:17:39):**  So absolutely.  And and people are waking up.  That's one thing I've noticed is there are people from all sorts of people you wouldn't think of that are getting involved in regenerative agriculture.  So so that that gives me some some positive hope and you just keep on doing things and and we ultimately it's the world is going to evolve, not based on what we think in our mind or our emotions or in our soul.  The world has its own its own momentum.  
**[0:18:12-0:18:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:18:12):**  And my this is this is kind of a Zen thing.  We just do you just we just do you know, I do you I do me you do you everybody does what they can.  And at the end of the day, if you felt like you've given it every you know, you've done the best you can.  That's all that we can give.  And we don't have to have any doubts.  
**[0:18:35-0:18:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:18:35):**  But if you don't follow your bliss, you don't follow what you think is good, then you're living a life, you know, not so fulfilling.  Absolutely. Yeah, I agree with you on so many levels there.  And, you know, it's like if everybody starts speaking about these basic foundational principles that are the key to helping fix all these huge problems.  Eventually, there will be a critical mass of people starting to think about how to make this come to life, even though soil is not a sexy topic.  Like soil on its own is never going to be like a buzzword topic.  
**[0:19:12-0:19:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:19:12):**  However, this is where I'm really grateful to Sadhguru and the whole Save Soil movement that for years, you know, you've been talking about soil for a long, long time.  I mean, a lot of people in this movement have been talking about saving soil for forever.  I mean, it's been an initiative in the United States since the 20s.  I mean, how many people even know that?  And but since Sadhguru started talking about it, I've probably had 30 different people reach out to me and go, is this what you've been talking about all this time?  
**[0:19:42-0:19:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:19:42):**  And I'm like, yeah, and leave it to like the guru to not get too scientific about it, not get too heady, too farmy, too whatever.  He's like, just save soil. Like, it's so simple.  And I think in that way, it's very powerful coming from someone who isn't an agronomist or isn't a soil scientist or isn't a farmer.  He just gets it that it has to happen and that he's like, I'm going to hang my hat on this and I'm going to ride this motorcycle off the cliff and tell people listen.  And I think that's really admirable and really cool because it'll appeal to people outside of our nerdy food systems world, which I love the nerdy food systems world.  
**[0:20:16-0:20:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:20:16):**  But guess what? The rest of the world does not care.  Like, we've got to break that barrier. We've got to get it out to the people who care and who move the needle, which ultimately is a lot of consumers because critical mass and money equates movement in markets.  So, I'm glad when other people pick up the banner and start to fly it outside of these little circles.  Yeah. And one thing I want to share, which I'm sometimes not so popular for kind of speaking, you know, truth to power.  And that's kind of my that's been my thing for many decades.  
**[0:20:48-0:21:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:20:48):**  But really, the environmental groups from like the Sierra Club to 350.org, you know, to Al Gore, you know, et cetera, what I there are what I call controlled opposition.  So the dysfunctional economic, you know, military industrial complex, they what they do is they fund and they support and they promote people who, quote, identify a problem and then propose a solution that does not threaten their economic interests.  So there's a reason why the Wall Street and and foundations, the United States fund people like Al Gore's projects, 350.org, because they never will tell you the following things that the majority of all carbon emissions and and pollution in the world is responsible for 10 percent of the wealthiest people in the world.  If we really wanted to make a difference, a climate change, you know, like Bill Gates should just park his his private plane a bit more, you know, sell off some of his 20,000 square foot homes.  So everybody can do instead of, you know, instead of taking, you know, getting up five airplanes a year, we could get on three airplanes or two.  
**[0:22:12-0:22:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:22:12):**  We all can do things that message is never shared at all for taking personal responsibility.  Instead, what they do is saying oil and coal is bad, bad, bad, bad.  And we're going to we're going to we're going to stop Exxon.  We're going to stop Chevron.  And if you look at the environmental group's record of the last 30 years, it's they fail every year, every year that the emissions keep going up.  
**[0:22:39-0:22:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:22:39):**  And now with the war in Russia and Ukraine, we're just going to it's drill, baby, drill.  So we're just going to burn more coal, more coal.  They're going to hold a ship to Europe. We're going to we're going to frack natural gas and then we're going to ship it over to Europe and do all sorts of big, huge terminals.  It's going to leak along the way.  You know, it's going to be massive amount burning fuel all over the oceans.  
**[0:23:07-0:23:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:23:07):**  And and this is this is the solutions that they've been promoting, like like solar and wind is going to is going to power the world.  And it's should we do that? Yes. But it's only a small portion of the solution.  In fact, if you look today, we're on path that if all the emissions that we're going to release in the next five years will increase the legacy load of greenhouse gas emissions by six percent.  If you put a lawn musk as as the emperor of energy and and and all the economy in the world today and in five years, he would be lucky to reduce emissions from a six percent in five years emission increase to four percent.  So it's really a rounding error that the damage that we're seeing and the mass, you know, the huge increases of of sun, of heat days, of the intensity of storms, of the droughts that's happening for what's already occurred.  
**[0:24:18-0:24:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:24:18):**  Right. Right. It's like legacy.  Yeah.  Legacy load.  So we're focusing on basically a rounding error in terms of what's going to happen in the next five years.  People don't want to hear this, but essentially, whether we go from from solar and wind, from oil and gas, it's going to make a minute difference in the next five years.  
**[0:24:43-0:24:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:24:43):**  Is it important we do it? Yes.  But what we need is drawdown.  We have to draw down that carbon.  And so we're just the they will say the critics will hear this and say, oh, John, we should do both.  Well, yeah, they do both.  
**[0:24:57-0:25:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:24:57):**  And they focus ninety nine point five percent of their money and effort.  In in a in a green techno solution.  Yeah.  Like you can just in your lifestyle, you can continue to fly in private jets.  You can continue to have massive homes.  
**[0:25:14-0:25:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:25:14):**  You can continue to burn fossil fuels to grow food.  You can continue to desertify.  We can destroy our mangroves. We can destroy the Amazon.  But we'll just do this green techno utopia fix and it's just dilute.  And instead, we can restore nature.  
**[0:25:31-0:25:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:25:31):**  And if we would invest in that, give an example of what we're doing.  And I have an organization I founded called Agroforestry Regeneration Communities.  And what I do is I do a lot of critiquing of the industrial model and people get upset and I call people out for that because someone has to and they can't cancel me.  You know, I'm retired, you know, former CEO founder.  So, you know, what are they going to what are they going to do?  
**[0:25:58-0:26:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:25:58):**  You know, I mean, and and so but I also focus on solutions.  So I so I essentially work with existing people who do food for us, both in Guatemala and East Africa.  If we've put in already, by the end of this year, we'll have had 5000 food for us in in Guatemala.  And there was a recent report that came out this last fall that that that I'll be posting on LinkedIn.  And Patrick Worms recently posted it, who's one of the leaders, experts in the world on regenerative ag.  
**[0:26:32-0:26:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:26:32):**  And he was one of our speakers at our webinars. We do webinars at Agroforestry Regeneration Communities.  But we've done in this report said that that of the land based solutions that regenerative agroforestry is the top solution out of regenerative ag.  And it's and it's very effective.  And essentially what we've what we've done with 3000 families in Guatemala is oftentimes they'll be growing corn.  It'll be in a slash and burn. They might be using synthetic fertilizers or or they just move from patch to patch erosion.  
**[0:27:11-0:27:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:27:11):**  You know, not a lot of nutrient density, not good for biodiversity.  And instead, we'll we'll work to take a portion of that and do a food for us.  Plant on contours will plant like nitrogen fixing trees.  We use a glyceria mother to cow. And this is like free fertilizer.  The leaves you clip the leaves drop, chop and drop. And then that provides fertilizer.  
**[0:27:34-0:27:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:27:34):**  And then we plant fruit trees diversity so they get fruit like avocados or mangoes or jackfruit.  And you can do that throughout the throughout the growing season.  Then we also grow alley crops next to these nitrogen fixing trees will grow pineapples, cassava, ginger, turmeric, sugar cane.  And in example, we have one very small farm and these are farmers that are like usually under one one or two hectares.  So, an example, one farmer grew pineapples and they'd never grown pineapples before they got in there.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:28:14):**  And this is in a remote area near the Caribbean, Guatemala.  They they they hauled their pineapples down to the creek, got into their boat, went to went to Livingston,  a little town in the Caribbean, and sold their 100 pineapples on the street corner for a dollar each.  For a very small farmer, one hundred dollars is a big deal.  And literally with 10 million dollars, we could we could expand to to maybe one hundred and fifty thousand families,  
**[0:28:46-0:28:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:28:46):**  which would which would equate to we would impact five percent of the population, Guatemala.  And that's the number one country that that that comes across the board in the U.S.  because they they and we find our farmers don't want to leave. They want to stay in. And because now they have an income, they have a future there.  You know, imagine if if you're one of the one of the people in community and you have mangoes and you have avocados, you know,  you know, people like, hey, I want to come over and do a party.  
**[0:29:18-0:29:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:29:18):**  Hey, you know, you know, why don't you come in and talk to my neighbors friends and see what they can help them.  And yet and yet we see that the leaders of the World Economic Forum, the leaders and these environmental organizations,  they're supporting the spending of a billion dollars in in in mining things to create carbon capture systems, metal fans and high tech solutions.  When when literally we can create food diversity, food resilience, I mean, biodiversity, increasing insects and butterflies and bird habitat, food resilience, income.  And yet we fund false solutions. Yeah.  
**[0:30:09-0:30:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:30:09):**  Things and we're hoping that we do. In fact, we were able to get four hundred thousand dollar grant from one tree planted, an organization that that gets money from large corporates.  So so we keep keep out what we're doing. And but that's an example of that.  The those who are supposedly in charge or who are tasked with this, who are telling the public it's like,  when's the last time that three fifty dot org? Or Sierra Club or what have you, these organizations, when did they tell their members about these simple solutions?  And it also addresses historic racism and social justice.  
**[0:30:57-0:31:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:30:57):**  And it's because their Wall Street benefactors don't want them to share this thing.  All they want to do is tell everybody Exxon and Chevron is bad. Solar and wind is good.  Let's stop drilling. Let's go to green energy. End of subject. And they've been saying it for 30 years.  And every year the situation gets worse. To me, this is outrageous.  And I ironically, nobody will say this publicly. I will say it.  
**[0:31:29-0:31:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:31:29):**  And it's one of the reasons why people don't like me because I'm willing to call people out on their bullshit.  And it's not like we need to be negative or attacking people.  But if you're taking public money and if you set yourself up as the so so-called solution solutions people and you you know this and they will say,  oh, we need to focus. Oh, it's too complex. And right now we're facing a huge food crisis.  And so not only does this address climate change, but it's going to allow people to eat and to live.  
**[0:32:11-0:32:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:32:11):**  Do you want to be politically correct or do you want to come from a place of love?  Because if you love your neighbors and you love people and you love the environment, you're going to work to make the best situation for as many people as possible.  And we all have our issues. And I certainly I could do a better job. I'm no perfect example.  But anyways, it's important to speak out now because do we want to wait till it's too late?  Do we want to wait till the systems collapse? And the other thing I like to say, I've been involved in conferences and and, you know, like the Wal-Mart Foundation had something a year and a half ago and they invited all these people to come together and create these white papers.  
**[0:33:06-0:33:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:33:06):**  We've been talking about this for 30 or 40 years. This is not rocket science.  No, it's not.  And taking farmers. But farmers are screwed over. You know, it's like farmers don't have access to selling for markets, for processing.  And, you know, it's not a free market. It's not a free market.  Yeah. Yeah. You know, so but, you know, we got to make a little trouble. We got to we got to, you know, like I like to say, if you want to make a delicious omelet, you know, you have to do to start with.  
**[0:33:41-0:33:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:33:41):**  You got to crack some crack some eggs.  Yeah, it's so true.  And, you know, authentic action over the long term is always wins over perfection in the short term.  And I think a lot of times we get hung up on, oh, we have to be perfect to be doing this when the reality is, is like little well thought out, authentic long term actions every day.  And, you know, at the end of the day, I had to go back because this is so exactly the same thing I get really charged up about.  
**[0:34:09-0:34:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:34:09):**  Nature based solutions don't have the IP potential that all these high tech solutions that are extractive, reductionistic and expensive do.  And that's why all the VC money is just flooding into all these potential answers and completely neglecting the only thing we know that does work, but doesn't have that profitability.  I mean, it's profitable, but it doesn't have like the crazy wild profitability that technological solutions do.  And that's disgusting and needs to change. Like, I'm so tired of it as well where I'm like, there's so many amazing things happening and they're all dying for funding.  And there are things that are meaningful and very, very important. And what do you know, someone pops up with some stupid widget and they get millions of dollars thrown at them just to make another thing that's going to end up in the landfill or like cause massive mining in another country that everyone here is all mad about mining.  
**[0:35:00-0:35:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:35:00):**  Oh, go do it in someone else's backyard. It's just fine. We'll buy that widget and we'll back it financially, too, by the way.  So it's a sick dysfunctional model. And right now venture capital is making the problem worse in my mind, is driving an engine that's really destructive and disgusting.  And I'm kind of over it right now myself. So what you just said totally resonated, but that's the battle I live every day.  And, you know, and it's unfortunately fostering independence and sovereignty does not build the coffers of billionaires.  It just doesn't. It actually is the opposite. And that's why they're against it. It's been like that forever.  
**[0:35:39-0:35:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:35:39):**  Yeah, well said. But we keep at it and the worst things get and the more, you know, like what it really needs is we need the nieces and nephews and friends to have uncomfortable conversations with the gazillionaires.  And that's what's driving part of it. You know, if when they get to the family dinners, you know, like if Bill Gates goes to a family gathering and his, you know, nieces give him a hard time about why are you funding Monsanto when you could be funding, you know, regenerative agriculture, you know, they need to be right in his face and tell him that.  And the more people, you know, and sometimes people do change and sometimes they won't because maybe there's another agenda and you can go down the rabbit hole on that.  Yeah, but we have to have those uncomfortable situations or things won't change. And unfortunately, it plays into this whole like constant virtue signaling culture where everyone's like, oh, let's talk about what reinforces us feeling good about what we're doing.  And both sides of the political spectrum and everybody is, you know, gets pulled into this in some way, shape or form. And, you know, it doesn't get anything done. It just perpetuates the same BS that we're dealing with every day.  
**[0:36:57-0:37:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:36:57):**  I'm glad you are outspoken about it. I think it's awesome. We need more of that.  Thank you.  Absolutely. So, you know, with your projects that you're doing right now, I know that you've worked extensively on agroforestry projects. You've also done a lot of work in the Great Plains and worked with Jessica, who's been on our show, in Great Plains Regeneration.  And I know that you've learned a lot through trying to push on the American agricultural sector because it is so institutionalized. It doesn't operate as a free market at all. It's actually totally, it's basically under the oppression of both government and huge monopolistic multinational companies control.  And the farmers continue to be the dog that gets wagged by the tail. And, you know, what did you learn through your work and your continued work with Great Plains Regeneration and working with the American Agricultural Institution?  
**[0:37:50-0:38:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:37:50):**  Yeah. Yeah. So right after, thanks for asking, right after Kiss the Ground came out, I said, well, where do I want to focus? We're going to have this window of opportunity to accelerate regenerative agriculture, this kind of, you know, 15 minutes of fame, of focus around regenerative agriculture with the moving coming out.  So I decided to work with farmers and ranchers with a passion of regenerative agriculture in the Great Plains. So we formed Great Plains Regeneration. And, you know, I saw clearly that, you know, farmers and ranchers were not getting paid a fair price.  We looked at what the leading crop was, was wheat. That's what they grow the most of in Kansas and Oklahoma. So worked a lot in researching, you know, the grains and how, you know, not only how grains are grown, but how they're processed and what are the opportunities there.  And we looked at a strategy to create a farmer driven, you know, CPG brand around, you know, value added processing of wheat into wheat, flowers, and basically go from a, from a, from a flower to a farm, I mean, farm to flower model.  And there's very few places that the farms can really even sell to. And there's, there's very little of any options to get, to get wheat processed, you know, even on a toll basis.  
**[0:39:31-0:39:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:39:31):**  So after about a year of going down the rabbit hole, I concluded that at the current scenario, with the current players, what wasn't possible to do.  And, and that the political and economic and social forces in the United States don't want to change. They don't want a regenerative agriculture system. They don't want farmers and ranchers to win.  You know, they, people have been agitating about this for decades. You know, there is some small changes at the edges. You know, there is going to be some money for meat processing. But, but so I decided that I would, I could get more results.  And I find when I work in Guatemala or Malawi, I don't have the extension agents. You know, we don't have, we don't have to worry about trying to unlearn the learned in America.  And that they know about soil, you know, that don't really know about soil health. They don't really understand, you know, the, the why cover crops are so important.  
**[0:40:42-0:40:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:40:42):**  I mean, Ray Archuleta says, if we really wanted to change agriculture in America, if we really want to do something right, we would just pay farmers, you know, you know, $50 an acre for cover crop.  And it's very simple. You take a photo, you give a GPS and we do it, but instead we're going to try some convoluted carbon, you know, carbon counting carbon system, which is very dysfunctional, that's unlikely to work and we're going to spend all sorts of money.  So it's basically going to be a boondoggle for the counters. You know, I, I chose to work in areas in regenerative agriculture for me personally, to make it, make a difference was I needed to leave the United States in terms of my focus much.  But, you know, I'm still, I still involved, but I, I'm just, we're getting more results. We're able to get, you know, we're going to get 2000 farmers to go to, you know, agro, you know, agroforestry models in Guatemala in a year where, where, you know, we haven't been able to get 2000 farmers across the Great Plains to go to regenerative model in this, this year.  You know, I mean, we have a lot of good growers and producers, but it's not accelerating because the economics and the education need to do more on that.  
**[0:42:08-0:42:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:42:08):**  But, but it's almost like we need a crisis. But, you know, you look, you think the Ukraine crisis would hit people, you know, you know, their shortages, there's going to be all sorts of food shortage.  I mean, the economist just said, you know, food crisis on the cover, you know, and, and maybe out of that collapse and out of people being challenged at their core, maybe will change.  And so, but there's lots of work we can all do. But I just feel like the barriers, the political, economic and social barriers are significant. And the unlearning, I was just on a seminar recently, the unlearning America has to do is significant.  Social media turns us into, you know, you know, arm armchair, you know, quarterbacks, and everyone's got an opinion on this or that.  I mean, we can't even, we can't even understand that the major, one of the major reasons for shortages of infant formula, that when you read the media, all the media says, well, it's because of the pandemic supply chain and a one facility, you know, was shut down because of quality assurance issues.  
**[0:43:41-0:43:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:43:41):**  But what we're not saying is that the one common ingredient, almost all baby form is United States is sunflower oil. They never mentioned this. And where do we get sunflower? Ninety percent comes from Russia and Ukraine. We're not going to get that.  And also the FDA makes it very hard to develop, you know, baby formula. So it's a monopolistic. So, but that's an example. People don't even know that.  Yeah, no, they don't. If they knew the extent of it, I think it would really make them stop and think very hard every time they run to the grocery store and fill their cart with a bunch of stuff that's all supporting these huge government incentivized monopolistic companies.  And I have a lot of friends. I mean, I live in North Idaho, so there's a lot of people who are like doing a lot of complaining about the big players and the billionaires and all this stuff. And then I'm like, I see them at the store and their carts full of every big company that is keeping all this BS in charge of their lives.  And the buck stops when it has, when you get between them and their Fritos. I mean, it just does. And it's just, it's painful to me. It just is. I'm like, you guys stop. You're sitting down to a big fat plate of corporate lies every time you sit down and eat, but you're better than everybody else because you didn't buy in.  
**[0:44:58-0:45:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:44:58):**  It's like, come on now. Put your walk into your talk and get real. I'm just really tired of it myself. I kind of hit a wall. Fresh out of F's.  Yeah. The other thing to mention is that, you know, we see the world through our tribal identity. So, like when a Democrat will be in, we're going to then blame the Democrats for the food system. All this corruption, this and this and that.  And then the Democrats or liberals won't say anything. So, I have all my liberal Democrat friends up when I call up Biden.  Then when Republican gets in, then those same people calling out the corruption of the billionaires and USDA and the president, then they quiet down because they're going to support the Republican. And then the Democrats and liberals are going to come out and critique it.  Where basically both sides are the same, just a different side of the coin, but corrupt in terms of our cultural policies.  
**[0:46:12-0:46:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:46:12):**  All while we neuter ourselves from actually getting anything done. It's like so insane. It's insanity at its finest. I'm with you there. It's very frustrating.  So, like as far as things that you're, I mean, John, I think you're one of these people that's actually, because you're willing to kind of put your neck out on the guillotine a little bit and just be like, let's get stuff done. Let's lean into what's uncomfortable.  But at the end of the day, like people who are listening that are kind of charged up by this and they're like, damn, I want to do something. Like, what do I do? What should people do?  Those little things they can do every day that don't make them perfect, but make them effective at trying to create change in the world. That's what needs to happen.  What's your call to action to listeners today? A simple thing is if you live in an apartment or you live in a house and you don't necessarily have a big garden, literally just get a container, a pot outside your house and grow some parsley, grow some lettuce, grow some kale, grow something that you can eat.  
**[0:47:11-0:47:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:47:11):**  You can also grow, even if you live in like in Northern Idaho in a colder area, you can grow things in the wintertime in a pot in your house.  I read someone is growing bananas in Ontario, Canada commercially in a greenhouse. And just the idea is doing something simple. Go to the farmer's market.  Like, say, why isn't there a farmer's market in your community? Like, support that. Support the farmer. I know someone who volunteers at a farm or six hours a week, just changing, eating more whole foods, less package.  Just these simple little things. If everybody adds to the whole, it would make a big difference.  Yeah, it really would.  
**[0:48:12-0:48:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:48:12):**  Don't compost or mulch. Don't throw your banana peels in the trash. That's one thing. And if you live in an apartment or you don't have a compost bin, you can throw it in your freezer. And then every once in a while, you just take it and just dump it outside. Even if you don't compost it, you can just mulch it.  Yeah, it's those little things that create more circular systems that break the cycles of dependency on all these entities that we're all fed up with, but we don't have the strength or the know how to push back.  And it's the little things every day that are going to make a huge difference. And I'm just, you know, I think people are wanting things that they can do right now.  They're like open to change because disruptive crisis creates fear and creates change. And it's unfortunate, but it is just kind of human nature. People are very reluctant to change when they're comfortable.  Yeah, here's another thing. Write a letter to your state or federal officials or regional and ask them to watch the film Kiss the Ground and say, why can't we help our farmers regenerate the soil?  
**[0:49:25-0:49:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:49:25):**  Because the farmers, they're open to these things, especially if you can explain it and if we can give an incentive, et cetera. So, you know, farmers and ranchers can be, you know, they may be contributing to soil destruction, but they can also be, on the flip side, can be part of the solution of soil health.  So, you know, it's how we look at it. And the time is now, you know, we don't have we are at a crisis. We've lost 75 percent of all winged insects in the United States and in Europe in the last 50 years.  There was a great graphic it talked about. It showed in the 1965, if you drove through an agricultural valley for much of the time, there would be insects all over the windshield. In 2022, when you drive through, you hardly see any insects.  And then they then they fast forwarded the same picture of the car and the windshield. But in 2050, there's no driver. So, my view is we are in the we are in the not the early stage.  We were we were we're more in the middle to latter stage of biodiversity collapse and means nature as we know it. You know, we've lost 70 percent of birds also. What a birds eat a lot of insects.  
**[0:51:02-0:51:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:51:02):**  And so the focus back on life herbicides. So we need to restore nature and everybody can do their do their do their part. We've also lost here's a statistic.  I want people to think what percentage of the Pacific.  Sardine population has disappeared since 2005. Guess what? Just everybody think what percentage that is.  It's 98 percent.  Whoa.  
**[0:51:35-0:51:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:51:35):**  Ninety percent are like a keystone species of the ocean.  Yeah.  And essentially what what and sardines eat plankton.  So everything in the ocean that lives either eats plankton or eats what eats plankton, i.e. sardines like, you know, sea lions and whales and et cetera.  And it's the oceans are collapsing because of rising temperatures. The oceans getting hotter and more acidic because of all the carbon on the ocean.  
**[0:52:12-0:52:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:52:12):**  So if we restore the soil, we restore the oceans and we can also grow kelp and we can reforest the oceans with with with plants.  But first, we've got to stop. And we also have to stop putting so many plastics in the ocean.  You know, I mean, literally we've made a big mess of it. Most people want to tune out because if you if they're if you geek out like you and I, it's so overwhelming.  Like, yeah, it's like, wow, this is just like, you know, what can one person do with seven or eight billion of us, you know, humans running around each with their own story, our own ego, our own needs, our own wants, challenges, challenges.  But, you know, we've seen change.  
**[0:52:56-0:53:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:52:56):**  You know, Martin Luther King, one man, you know, helped spark, you know, we're not turning, you know, water hoses against people from Africa in the United States.  We may still discriminate. There may still have poor, you know, school systems and lack of food and stuff in certain areas.  But, you know, there was some there has been some change. We need to make more change. That's that's an example of he painted a very clear future, a clear vision of what the future could look like.  And that one statement changed the way people saw the future. And then it's come to life ever since.  And like you said, we have so much more work to do, but we can learn a lot by what Dr. King said about let's stick our stake in the ground and paint a clear picture of what the future can look like.  
**[0:53:52-0:54:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:53:52):**  And then let's get everybody working together to get there instead of all this silly strife and the big powers that be that want us to keep fighting.  They want us to not trust each other. They want us to not work as communities because guess what? Nature based, community based solutions don't create profit ROI for billionaires.  They don't because they create sovereignty in the communities and smaller, you know, like just set decentralized economic gain.  And we have to push back on that. Individuals have got to take the bull by the horns and own that or we're screwed.  Yeah. And remember what Dr. King said. We don't have time for hate. I encourage everybody do not hate. If you're a liberal, do not hate conservatives.  
**[0:54:36-0:54:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:54:36):**  If you're a conservative, don't hate liberals. You know, this is we've become too we've been so tribal.  So important to, you know, to have some compassion and understanding. And I know people get upset.  And but, you know, I mean, this is what our parents generation was not into all this hate.  You know, like politicians used to be able to talk to each other. Yeah. You know, I guess they're they're walking up to the steps of Congress and yelling at each other, you know, threaten, you know, before they would laugh, they would, you know, like, you know, well, you know, we maybe we better, you know, and like that's a that's a it's a it's a good model.  We can we can learn from our from our elders. Yeah, we can bring that back. I'm working on it, working on raising kids that they feel like their friends can be across the spectrum.  
**[0:55:30-0:55:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:55:30):**  And that diversity of thinking is as important as diversity of what we're seeing in our environment, diversity of our communities and honoring people that look different, think different, feel different.  All of it. It has to be politically, too, or we will again that lack of unification will cause us to fail. So I'm glad we're talking about this is something I'm really passionate about. And you know how passionate I am about that, you know.  Right. And one thing I wanted to share is I learned in running the TVA and we had one hundred and twenty people and we could have been from like the United Nations, 30 or 40 countries, one of the greatest tapped untapped resources and great greatest assets in America today is our human resources.  And when you treat people with respect and compassion in the workplace, in your organization, you'll be amazed what they produce, especially for women, you know, BIPOC people, because they haven't been treated fairly in previous organizations and society.  And it was one of the successes that Nativa was able to grow so fast is we really supported and worked with leadership training for many of our women leaders and Latino and black folks that didn't get that before.  
**[0:56:55-0:57:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:56:55):**  And they ended up really rising and and and really helped. So that's one thing we need to do. And it's an important lesson. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so and they they just love it when they when when this like I remember this one Latino woman, she was saying she didn't even want to use her name in her last last company because because they would she thought they would tease her and make fun of her.  And we would put up with any of that bullshit. It starts at the top. And I wouldn't put up with any any those discrimination. And if things were said inappropriately, we dealt with it. And and if the person said it again, they they were fired.  And and, you know, those people, many of our people ended up rising in positions of management of the company. So really important, you know, and it is businesses build strong communities in that way. I mean, they really do.  So, John, this is you have done so much cool stuff in your life, I feel like we could almost have like a part two, we might have to invite you back for a second session. And maybe some of our other guests and have like a panel at some point where we're talking about like Dune coming back and talking about the oceans and Chef Pierre talking about his work in Africa as well.  And it's like there's all these common threads that come together and all these people that are doing so much and dedicating their lives that could be spent lounging at some resort somewhere getting martinis served to you all day on a yacht.  
**[0:58:22-0:58:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:58:22):**  But I love that you're giving back to your community and you're continuing to dig harder, work harder and make the future look in a way where we can have flourishing for humans and for nature both.  So thank you so much for joining us. And I'm going to put in a bunch of links of where to find you. If people want to follow your work and get involved, what they can do, how they can learn more about your organization.  So I'll make sure that we put those in the show notes. But I just really appreciate you taking the time and sharing your passion with us and all the things you're doing to make the world a better place. So thanks, John.  Yeah, thank you. Let's regenerate.  Let's regenerate.  
**[0:59:00-0:59:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/2d771060#t=0:59:00):**  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry. We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  Find out more about our work at SnacktivistFoods.com.  