---
title: Food As Medicine And Regenerative Ag
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-12-01)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Vivian Kanchian  

**[0:00:00-0:00:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:00:26):**  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  
**[0:00:52-0:01:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:00:52):**  Hello and welcome everybody. Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast. I'm Joni, I'm your host, and I'm very excited to welcome Vivian Kenshin today to join us and talk about regenerative agriculture and food as medicine.  So welcome Vivian.  Thank you. Good to be here.  
**[0:01:12-0:01:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:01:12):**  Yeah, I'm just thrilled to have you here because you're one of those people that I learned about via LinkedIn and kind of became friends on LinkedIn and have loved watching your journey and the things that you work on.  And figured if we were going to get together and talk about your work, it would be best to record it so we could share it with other people who are interested to learn more about this subject as well.  So I would love to hear, you know, just not knowing a ton about about you and a ton about your background, it'd be really fun to dig in a little bit and just kind of learn more about where you're from, where you grew up, how did you end up doing what you're doing today?  
**[0:01:48-0:02:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:01:48):**  Because you have had, like many of us in regenerative, kind of a circuitous path.  Many of us have come from the health side. Many of us have come from the ag side. I'm always really excited to hear what brought you here today.  Sure. So I grew up in L.A. I'm actually a Los Angeles native, but I come from Armenian parents who grew up in Iran.  
**[0:02:12-0:02:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:02:12):**  And so food has always kind of, you know, always been percolating in the background in our in our home. And it was always just an expression of love.  And I also happen to have two parents that are, you know, kind of health nutty, I guess you could say.  So I always grew up around the idea that food is love and it's always also, you know, to care about what you put into your body.  
**[0:02:39-0:03:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:02:39):**  I did come to this path very circuitously, maybe a little bit more than most. I used to work in photography, so photosindication.  And I enjoyed a really long and successful career. But I've always been interested in nutrition just based on my background.  I've always been curious. I've always been the one who friends will come to and, you know, ask about remedies.  
**[0:03:07-0:03:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:03:07):**  What can I do to lower my cholesterol or I have acid reflux?  And so I got a lot of nudges both from friends and family in the universe to eventually, you know, answer that calling.  So later in life, I went on to earn my bachelor's degree and I also got additionally certified for supplements and herbs and went on to work and apprentice with a naturopathic doctor, Dr. Gerber here in L.A.  
**[0:03:36-0:04:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:03:36):**  Specialized in women's health and, you know, kind of just learned about how to balance hormones and health naturally.  And then I was doing a lot of dabbling, kind of trying to figure out where I fit.  And so after my bachelor's, I went on, I took a little break and I went on to earn my master's in public health.  
**[0:04:01-0:04:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:04:01):**  Very cool.  Thank you.  That's quite something to take on, honestly. That's a big undertaking.  
**[0:04:08-0:04:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:04:08):**  It really is. It really is.  I thought several times that I was going to lose my mind.  Yeah, that's a lot of work.  
**[0:04:18-0:04:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:04:18):**  And, you know, public health is an interesting space that most people don't give a ton of thought to.  As an RN and someone who worked in nursing for over a decade, like I have a very kind of close rub with public health and what public health is and what that means to communities.  Because I feel like often it operates without people really fully appreciating the value it adds to the community and where it is involved.  
**[0:04:45-0:05:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:04:45):**  Like it's so many different layers of involvement and so many different touch points.  It's not just health, like as in accessing doctors, etc. It's like water quality and, you know, like food safety and like all these different things kind of conglomerate, you know, conglomerate behind the concept of public health.  So that's a really cool lens to look at regenerative systems through.  
**[0:05:08-0:05:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:05:08):**  Yeah, definitely.  And, you know, as I was making my way through the two year degree, I was, you know, constantly thinking how does this apply? How does this apply holistically?  Because I also found it a very kind of siloed in the way that I was learning about the topic.  
**[0:05:28-0:05:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:05:28):**  But always in the back of my mind, I was like, how many use this more holistically?  And it took quite a while to kind of arrive at something that really clicked for me.  So again, I was, you know, I worked for a food is medicine program. I helped launch and grow.  
**[0:05:49-0:06:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:05:49):**  Yeah, that's an interesting one. Angel Project, is that what it was called?  Project Angel Food here in LA.  Yeah. Tell us a little bit about that. That one actually really caught my interest and I would love to hear a little bit more about what that project did when you were there.  
**[0:06:04-0:06:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:06:04):**  Sure. So basically it was a state funded program.  And so the state was trying to cut health care costs because so many people had this condition congestive heart failure.  And it's one of the most expensive conditions that there is.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:06:21):**  Yes.  So they were just trying to see how it responds nutritionally by providing medically tailored meals to people who had state sponsored health insurance.  Just to see if we can keep people out of the hospital, improve their quality of life and at the same time save some money.  
**[0:06:41-0:07:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:06:41):**  You know, that's usually what initiates or precipitates this sort of program coming to fruition.  Right.  So yeah, it was just a program that provided medically tailored meals. They were delivered, home delivered and for free.  
**[0:07:00-0:07:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:07:00):**  It was a 12 week program. And at the end of the program, the idea was that we were going to crunch some numbers, see how much, how improved certain markers of health were.  And also if there was any cost savings. So that piece of it is still kind of happening.  But there was a program that kind of also came out of it because it was so successful just without us crunching numbers.  
**[0:07:27-0:07:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:07:27):**  Yeah.  They applied this to a diabetes program.  Yeah, that's fantastic because CHF, I'll just call it that for short, congestive heart failure.  
**[0:07:37-0:08:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:07:37):**  You know, readmission rates are extremely high in populations of patients that are managing CHF.  And a lot of people don't realize too that if you discharge a patient and they're managing CHF and then they're readmitted to the hospital within a certain length of time, the hospital gets actually penalized.  Like they lose part of the payment reimbursement for the next time that patient comes.  
**[0:08:02-0:08:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:08:02):**  So there's a huge pressure at a policy level, at an insurance level because of these guidelines and benchmarks that have been put into place.  But the compliance is very, very low because of sodium. And it's so hard to avoid high levels of sodium in processed foods.  The majority of people go home, even if they know that they shouldn't eat a lot of sodium, they have processed foods and that's what they have access to.  
**[0:08:26-0:08:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:08:26):**  And then boom, they're right back in the hospital.  So the concept of medically tailored meals there is really, you know, you can see how it would actually make a significant impact on readmission rates and management of those.  So diabetes as well. There's more and more conversations about these types of things popping up all over the place.  
**[0:08:47-0:09:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:08:47):**  In fact, we had Erin Martin on and they are doing some pilots in Tulsa that are also demonstrating these types of approaches where you're providing appropriate meals and then gauging response and access to medical care following diet changes.  And it's like, I mean, to all of us, we're like, well, duh, that makes sense.  But it's interesting how you need that data to show cost savings to start really moving practice.  
**[0:09:16-0:09:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:09:16):**  Definitely. You know, it was a very fulfilling thing to do. It was really great to see people just, you know, kind of heal from these conditions, at least somewhat partially.  Yeah.  But I'd always wanted to do something more upstream. You know, I did not gotten into the business of nutrition to, you know, to heal people that were severely sick.  
**[0:09:45-0:10:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:09:45):**  Of course, there is a place for that. But what really just irked me is that, you know, if our food system would change, there would be a huge trickle down effect.  And, you know, all this unnecessary suffering, all this unnecessary cost, it wouldn't even have to happen.  Right. And in these types of chronic diseases significantly shorten people's lifespans as well as impacting quality of life and GDP.  
**[0:10:15-0:10:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:10:15):**  And so it is always frustrating, I think, to all of us that pay attention to nutrition. Why do we wait until people are managing a chronic disease?  Why aren't we, you know, going downstream and looking at early lifestyle changes like, you know, childhood, early adulthood that we could implement ways of living that would help prevent development of these chronic debilitating diseases later in life.  And, you know, I can see naturally where you came to that. But the regenerative piece is something that I don't come across as having a lot of awareness in nutrition circles and in healthcare circles.  
**[0:10:50-0:11:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:10:50):**  I mean, even still, I feel like it's kind of slow to enter the vernacular as a concept and really making that connection to quality of food, having a very intricate link to quality of soil.  And I'd love to hear about how, like where your aha moment was, like how you brought in that layer of it.  Yeah, I mean, part of it, so I learned about regenerative agriculture as it is called today, right? It's an indigenous practice. It's been around for a very long time.  
**[0:11:20-0:11:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:11:20):**  But I learned about it through watching the film Kiss the Ground. Many friends were nudging me about it.  They knew that I wanted to work in the climate space and use my nutrition skills, but I just didn't know how those two things connected.  And so I picked up a book by Joel Saladin, which is called The St. Normal, and he talks about just our dependence on fossil fuels and how things could be different.  
**[0:11:47-0:12:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:11:47):**  Mark Hyman's Food Fix about how we can actually change policy and it would have all these trickle down effects into the quality of the food that we eat, the quality of the water, air we breathe, and etc.  And that's kind of how I came to the idea or the concept of regenerative agriculture as it is called formally.  But really, you know, common sense is what really, of course, it makes sense that there's a circular process that we're all connected, that we're connected to nature, what you put into your food.  
**[0:12:29-0:12:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:12:29):**  I give the example of, you know, if you're baking a cake, right? If you use sawdust instead of, you know, using flour, you're going to get a very different result.  But somehow, you know, we have been conditioned by food brands to think, no, ingredients don't matter.  It doesn't matter if it's organic or if it's not organic. It's all the same calories and calories.  
**[0:12:53-0:13:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:12:53):**  Right. Calories are calories. Yeah. It's like this very reductionistic concept and, you know, we're starting to realize that, you know, really it is such a poor standard of comparison.  You know, just looking at the energy, like the calories, it really doesn't give you any indication of like nutritional integrity.  And that is such a different conversation.  
**[0:13:16-0:13:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:13:16):**  Kiss the Ground is one of those things that, I mean, for those of you who are listening, I'm assuming you've probably seen it because if you're listening to Regenerative by Design podcast, chances are you've probably come across Kiss the Ground.  But if you haven't, definitely write it down and watch it this weekend. It's on Netflix or, you know, like it's out there.  You can find it on non-subscription type television access media.  
**[0:13:39-0:14:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:13:39):**  And we've had John Rulack on the show before and he was the producer and it was fun hearing about like his process of how he came to that and why he had such a profound need to produce a film that would allow this movement to be distilled into like something that someone could sit down and enter a world that would change the way they look at the world forever.  And we've had Ray Arcaletta on the show. We've had a number of the people from the show, which is fantastic because it is kind of like the center of the regenerative universe, so to speak, in the United States.  Even though, like you said, it's not that it's a brand new concept. We're rediscovering it in the Western world.  
**[0:14:20-0:14:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:14:20):**  And it's very important that we rediscover it very, very quickly.  So, you know, I love that you have spent some time working with the Kiss the Ground crew.  What were you doing when you were working with Kiss the Ground?  
**[0:14:33-0:15:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:14:33):**  So I was working on their development team. So a lot of communications related stuff, particularly centered around nutrition.  My goal was to create a group of health practitioners in support of regenerative agriculture, although we didn't quite make it to that. But I think it's still on their list of to-dos.  It's just they have grown exponentially and they're kind of to narrow in on their focus.  
**[0:15:09-0:15:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:15:09):**  So I was working in development and in bringing funding to the cause of regenerative agriculture.  Very cool. Yeah, it needs more funding, desperately needs more funding.  On many levels, like from marketing to products that are actually using regenerative ingredients and trying to help demonstrate regenerative in a consumer tangible way.  
**[0:15:37-0:16:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:15:37):**  So that's a constant thing. And then I understand that there are more movies coming too. Is that right?  Yeah, there is a sequel to the film coming. There's also a great animated film that's coming out called The Possibilities of Redemption.  And I've seen little pieces of it. It is absolutely stunning and very moving.  
**[0:16:03-0:16:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:16:03):**  Cool.  And yeah, and just to get back to your comment about more funding needed.  The exciting thing is that I don't know if you've been following COP 27, but they they regenerative agriculture is very much on the agenda.  
**[0:16:20-0:16:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:16:20):**  And one of the things that was discussed was that so you need to be raising 10 times the amount of funding to meet our climate needs by 2030.  So that's scary and exciting.  It's a call to action.  
**[0:16:37-0:16:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:16:37):**  Yeah.  Yeah, but it's a very clear call to action to those who are in the financial sector because it is early.  And so I think there are investors that perceive it as being like, oh, it's too nascent. I don't want to be the first wave because it's riskier.  
**[0:16:52-0:17:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:16:52):**  But what a lot of investors don't realize is like this has to work. It's not like, oh, the first wave of a new widget that like fidget spinners here today gone tomorrow.  I mean, this is like a this is a permanent transition of our entire system.  And so early movers, although it may be challenging the first few years, there is going to be a really good ROI as this whole system transforms.  
**[0:17:20-0:17:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:17:20):**  So for all of you listeners out there, there are many brands and many, many good causes that need financial backing.  So time to get off the sidelines and get into the game and really help make this reality because it is there's like they've been discussing at COP.  I mean, time is not on our side. Like we don't have time to wait around and kind of watch for a few years and decide whether or not this is a go.  
**[0:17:45-0:18:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:17:45):**  We are kind of in a race against time to transition these things immediately as we watch global soils erode and disappear and desertification, climate refugees.  I mean, there's so many things. So I'm glad that they're pushing on that urgency because it is an urgent thing.  Yeah. You know, on the inside at Kiss the Ground, I can say that there really is no shortage of people who are impact investors who really want to invest in this.  
**[0:18:15-0:18:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:18:15):**  So it's very heartening, very encouraging. People get it. The people that really that really need to get it are getting it.  So, yeah, very encouraging on the back end.  Yeah, absolutely. I agree. So like when you're looking at this regenerative movement and, you know, there are so many rabbit holes we could go down to, you know, go down, you know, from a climate perspective, from all these different perspectives.  
**[0:18:44-0:19:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:18:44):**  But when it comes to human health and the overall impacts that we could make on human health, let's just say in America or even in California specifically to kind of narrow it in.  What do you think, like, you know, if we really did a mass transition, what do you think we'd see from a public health perspective as we transform our food system to regenerative model?  Yeah. So, I mean, I think that we'd see a lot of waste curbed first and foremost.  
**[0:19:16-0:20:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:19:16):**  There's a lot of talk about, oh, can regenerative agriculture feed the world? And, you know, we currently produce a lot of food, a lot of it is nutrient dense and a lot of it gets thrown away.  So, if we were able to actually do that in a more efficient way, do it more locally and efficiently and create, for example, pipeline from farm to school or farm to hospitals, farm to institutions of all kinds, that would create a demand for farmers who are looking for consumers to buy their product.  And it would keep, you know, we wouldn't have to use diesel fuel to, you know, to ship 1500 miles to your plate.  
**[0:20:03-0:20:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:20:03):**  Yeah. Yeah.  You know, and we would be eating nutrient dense food that didn't actually have a lot or any chemicals in it.  That's, you know, a one, two punch. Not only are you getting healthier food that has much more nutrients ounce for ounce, but you would also be getting, you know, you wouldn't be ingesting chemicals that you didn't need to be getting.  
**[0:20:25-0:20:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:20:25):**  And in addition to that, you know, California is going through a drought. So, as we know, we really need to conserve water and regenerative agriculture is really great at that. Right?  You have water in the soil, then you're much more likely to have small water cycles come back.  That means that more rainfall, right? So it goes from the ground to the sky and falls as rain.  
**[0:20:52-0:21:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:20:52):**  So, just a lot of different benefits to bringing regenerative agriculture.  Yeah, definitely. And, you know, I think that the reduction in inputs is something that is really important to talk about when it comes to public health because, you know, exposure to agriculturally related chemicals is a significant health emergency like globally.  But even in our own nation, I mean, you look at correlations of, you know, and I've had these discussions with farmers on the show before, you know, we'll see belts of Parkinson's disease, we'll see belts of cancer.  
**[0:21:34-0:21:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:21:34):**  We, it seems obvious that there are correlations to exposures to things in the environment.  And when you see heavy industrial agriculture, it's natural to want to make those correlations, although they're not always present.  And I've often wondered if that was by design that, you know, there's reasons why they're kind of hampering that data from getting out because they don't want to change the agricultural system.  
**[0:21:58-0:22:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:21:58):**  And if they have the data proving that these health issues are caused by the ag, well, then you have a problem and you have to change the ag and they don't want to change it.  But, you know, long story short, what I love about regenerative is literally demonstrated in a quote from Brent Ullorn, who's a farmer in my region.  He's in Idaho and he and his family farm have been transitioning to regenerative over the last few years.  
**[0:22:23-0:22:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:22:23):**  And he just announced that he's actually now, they came to it like from a conventional, conventional mindset.  They never wanted to go organic. They didn't. That was not the lens that they were looking at the farming system through.  Well, now they're actually transitioning a portion of their farm to certified organic, not because that's where they intended to get to.  
**[0:22:43-0:23:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:22:43):**  It literally happened because of a soil health focus and a regenerative focus.  And they're like, well, now it qualifies for organic because we have not used any synthetic inputs on this for years.  And that is a very powerful transformation when you look at a farm that was using very heavy chemical use before and that through this regenerative process,  
**[0:23:05-0:23:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:23:05):**  they naturally eliminated it without them, like, trying to make that happen.  That was not their goal. And I think that when we apply that kind of an example to other areas and you look at how much of California is covered in ag  and how close that is to population centers, how urgent it is for us to be, you know, using those techniques to reduce that burden of agricultural sprays  
**[0:23:30-0:23:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:23:30):**  and additives that end up in our water, end up in everything, like end up in, you know, not even just in the food.  We often think about, oh, I don't want spray on my food. But often it's like the spray that's just drifting through the air or that's in the water table,  so in the water that you drink or the breast milk that your baby gets.  
**[0:23:47-0:24:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:23:47):**  Yeah. You know, it's interesting that you mentioned Parkinson's because that was, you know, one of the statistics that really jumped out at me.  That amounts of Parkinson's have doubled in the last 20 years and are expected to double again by 2040.  So why? Right? I mean, what is one of the big changes that we've had over the last 20 years, over the last 40 years even, that is, you know, causing us to be allergic to weed,  
**[0:24:18-0:24:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:24:18):**  causing us, you know, to start a new system to go haywire. And yeah, I love that story about Brent because I'm hoping it's the micro of the macro.  I'm hoping that, you know, I think that they did what they had to do because of the circumstances that they were facing.  And, you know, and we know that we're facing a worldwide shortage of fuel, right?  
**[0:24:44-0:25:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:24:44):**  And so much of our food system currently depends on it.  So if we can, you know, if we can incentivize farmers, if we can support them and give them the education and the network that they need, the structure that they need, then they can all do this.  Right. It's an amazing demonstration that it can be done and it can be done at scale.  
**[0:25:13-0:25:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:25:13):**  Like they're still profitable. They've not had issues with affecting yield. Like they're still running a great successful farming system, but now they're doing it without dependency on external inputs.  Fantastic model that can be scaled. And I love those demonstrations that were like, oh, you know, this wasn't even what we set out to do and look what happened.  Like that's such a cool, that's to me, that is just such a cool example of what can happen.  
**[0:25:43-0:26:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:25:43):**  And, and, you know, honestly, when you do look at the epidemiology from a public health perspective, there is pretty clear persuasive data in my mind that indicates that it needs to be an initiative to like, oh, hey, we need to stop using excessive chemicals in our ag systems  because of these numbers, these statistics that we're seeing. And to me, like as a nurse, I mean, I'm a patient advocate. That's what nurses do.  It seems really, really clear, but it gets murky. So the more that we can shift that picture, I just feel like, you know, the repercussions on future generations, like we don't even know,  
**[0:26:26-0:26:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:26:26):**  we haven't had enough generations from the time of chemical intensive agriculture to understand the long-term population effects.  So reversing that needs to happen ASAP.  I'm with you, Joni.  
**[0:26:41-0:27:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:26:41):**  Yeah. It's a crazy thought.  Yeah. Even though I'm not a nurse, I definitely got into this because I really believe that people can empower themselves, you know, and they know themselves better than their own doctor most of the time.  So I think, you know, we're very quick now to pop a pill, to go to the doctor.  
**[0:27:05-0:27:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:27:05):**  Even, you know, us medical professionals have kind of been conditioned to think that that's the right way to go.  But something happened kind of at a pretty formative year for me with my dad who had some kind of a joint condition that he was dealing with.  And he was a very active guy at the time, you know, he was in his 50s, very active, always getting around, riding his bike, walking.  
**[0:27:37-0:28:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:27:37):**  And suddenly he was having some joint pain in his knee and it really hampered his lifestyle.  He wasn't able to walk from one end of the room to the other.  And he went to see a doctor, a surgeon at the time, and sometimes, you know, some of the details get lost when my dad tells his stories, but he went to see a doctor, the doctor recommended surgery and that it would leave him walking with a cane and with one leg shorter than the other.  
**[0:28:09-0:28:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:28:09):**  Oh, wow. That's intense.  Super intense in your 50s and this vibrant, you know, just active guy.  So he came home angry, just like, why would I ever do such a thing?  
**[0:28:25-0:28:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:28:25):**  You know, I don't have one leg shorter than the other now and I don't walk with a cane.  So how would I go in and do that to myself?  And then he went ahead and did a little searching at the time, I think he went to the library and looked up micro fish to look at studies about joint health.  
**[0:28:50-0:29:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:28:50):**  And he came across a study by Harvard University about chicken collagen.  And so he went out and bought chicken feet and my mom cooked chicken feet for him on a weekly basis, a big pot of chicken feet.  He would eat the gelatin, you know, the gelatin broth and he healed himself with that broth.  
**[0:29:13-0:29:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:29:13):**  Wow. Yeah. That's amazing.  That was a game changer for me.  So we are the master of our own health. Of course, we need a doctor's advice from time to time, but really what we need to believe is that we can heal ourselves.  
**[0:29:32-0:29:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:29:32):**  It's all within us.  And have that proactive mindset of like, I, you know, I'm not happy with this, you know, scenario.  Like what can I do to invest in my own health and, you know, just often I feel like there's a real disconnect there and a disconnect that food can be transformative.  
**[0:29:53-0:30:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:29:53):**  Like I think there's often this kind of eye roll with a lot of people where they're like, oh, yeah, yeah, sure. Like food.  But then you meet people that have had debilitating illnesses and modified their diet and it transformed their lives.  Like it literally changed from a, you know, life that wasn't very optimized to, you know, being able to do new things, extend their life, like have the quality of life and the productivity that they wanted.  
**[0:30:21-0:30:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:30:21):**  And we don't talk about that enough.  Like, I don't think we give that enough value and value.  And I don't think it's about the next latest, greatest superfood or like some imported.  
**[0:30:33-0:30:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:30:33):**  I mean, I love fun, imported, cool things that are healthy, like I kind of have a guilty pleasure there.  But a lot of times it's foundational foods, like very basic foods that humans have eaten for millennia.  Like, you know, chicken feet are a very important part of like cultural foods in other countries.  
**[0:30:52-0:31:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:30:52):**  In the United States, they, unless you are part of an ethnic population that uses that in like, you know, some type of a dish,  it's often something that people just are like, oh, yeah, why would I eat that?  But when you think about like, A, you know, like you're eating, if you already eat meat, if you're vegan or vegetarian, obviously it's a different conversation.  
**[0:31:11-0:31:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:31:11):**  But, you know, like it's like this way of looking at foundational foods and basic foods through like a different attitude of like, oh, these can be very nourishing and enriching.  These can be medicinal.  And I think that alone is really, really transformative.  
**[0:31:29-0:31:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:31:29):**  Yeah, absolutely.  I think that, you know, everybody has their path.  And when I share stories like this, part of me wants to kind of have a disclaimer with it because people are like, well, I had the same condition and it didn't help me.  
**[0:31:51-0:32:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:31:51):**  So I'm not saying that it's something that works for everybody, but I'm saying that we don't give it enough of a shot. Right?  Exactly. Exactly.  Yeah, because it's just one piece of the puzzle.  
**[0:32:03-0:32:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:32:03):**  I mean, you know, if you're like fixing a house because the foundation is bad, it doesn't matter how many times you fix the exterior and the stucco, it'll still keep cracking because the foundation is broken.  And that's the thing.  We are in the habit in the United States of applying band-aids rather than getting to the root of the problem.  
**[0:32:23-0:32:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:32:23):**  And food is often a huge part of that problem.  So, like, I don't know. I mean, I'm in the business of trying to shift our food system.  Like, I must be some sort of weird masochist of sorts because it is not easy, especially like focused on like really foundational foods like chicken feet.  
**[0:32:41-0:33:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:32:41):**  Perfect example. Like, I focus on grains.  Like, how do we shift and reclaim our grain sector from like the kind of sick level that they've gotten to today in like our mainstream food system where grain-based foods really are a huge source of issue when it comes to diet-related disease because they're not what they used to be.  And I personally believe we need to go back to ancient grains and we need to reclaim that culinary heritage from corporate entities.  
**[0:33:10-0:33:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:33:10):**  And that's a big part of regeneration. That's a big part of regenerative theory.  And often I think people don't know where to start.  Like, for you talking to people, you know, whether it be in the public, whether it be through Kiss the Ground, whether it be like even on a podcast like this, like, where do you think people should start to shift that focus of the food system from quantity back to quality?  
**[0:33:36-0:34:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:33:36):**  Well, I think that there is huge power in numbers.  Luckily, there are coalitions now, grassroots coalition based, including Regenerate America, Kiss the Ground.  One of the places that people can start is to go to the website, regenerateamerica.com and just join, kind of keep up with what the developments are, policy, lend their help if they have it, a few hours a week of whatever it is that you do best.  
**[0:34:13-0:34:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:34:13):**  Maybe you're good at marketing, PR, whatever the case may be.  You know, on a more local level, getting to know your farmers market, purveyors, your farmers and supporting them because what they do is not easy.  And you'll be eating much better than probably shopping at the grocery store.  
**[0:34:35-0:35:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:34:35):**  And even though it's a little bit more expensive, I consider it, you know, health insurance when you buy that.  And then, you know, if it's an option, growing your own food or going to a community garden, dissipating, really kind of understanding what it's like or, you know, when you plant a seed and see it come out of the ground and how the frost might affect it or how the sun might affect it.  And just really connecting to kind of, you know, blood, sweat and tears that go into growing food.  
**[0:35:14-0:35:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:35:14):**  Yeah. It's a bit of a miracle when you watch it unfold in front of you.  You're like, wow, you go to the store and I'm like, I mean, I've gardened for my entire life and I still like go to the store sometimes.  I'm like, how do they get so many beautiful heads of broccoli?  
**[0:35:30-0:35:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:35:30):**  Like my broccoli can be really nice, but I'm like, I like clearly I've got a long ways to go.  It's nothing short of a miracle to be able to pull that off at scale.  I mean, it is really amazing.  
**[0:35:42-0:35:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:35:42):**  And I think that there is definitely something magical and people connecting with that at a personal level.  And kids love it.  I mean, kids, it's interesting watching kids like plant a seed and it comes up and that is a pretty empowering thing to witness.  
**[0:35:59-0:36:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:35:59):**  Definitely. And it's a great time to start as a kid.  Yeah, absolutely. So Vivian, what's next for you? What are you doing? What's your next move?  You know, I'm marinating. I'm marinating on my next move, but I think that I'm really kind of intrigued by impact investing.  
**[0:36:22-0:36:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:36:22):**  So that's the route that I take. That sector really needs the help.  It does.  I have a background in development. I would love to kind of more nutritional kind of blends into the impact investing field.  
**[0:36:42-0:37:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:36:42):**  So that and doing to communicate and raise awareness around regenerative agriculture, particularly in health practitioner circles.  Yeah, absolutely.  Next month, health professionals, regenerative agriculture, they're a European organization.  
**[0:37:08-0:37:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:37:08):**  Wonderful.  We need more of that. I think it's just something that, you know, having worked in like our US medical systems for a long time,  like it's something that I think a vast majority of people could really get behind if they understood it, because it's not trying to sell some extreme diet that has like crazy restrictions or crazy excesses.  
**[0:37:32-0:37:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:37:32):**  It's literally just quality over quantity like it's something that every medical person could and should really get behind.  And it was it was really interesting talking to Ray Arquette a couple of weeks ago on the show here.  And he was talking about some of his current projects being really focused on telling the story of regeneration and regenerative agriculture through faith based communities.  
**[0:37:58-0:38:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:37:58):**  And I think, again, great access point to reach people in a really important communication opportunity.  And I think the health care segment also needs that really targeted focus narrative, because once they start talking about it,  once they start realizing and seeing the value of how it can transform our relationship with food,  
**[0:38:19-0:38:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:38:19):**  I think that it's something that could have massive support from our even our Western medical establishment.  Like the people that are in it. Yeah. So I'm glad that you're thinking about like that angle as well and that there are people working on that.  I've been kind of hoping to see that pop up so I can help help with that, too.  
**[0:38:39-0:39:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:38:39):**  You know, whatever we can do. You're definitely seeing a lot more.  You know, of course, you have your Mark Hymans and Andrew Wiles, the doctors that are kind of already in the integrative space.  But Zach Bush and yeah, and you're just you're just seeing that ramp up. I can definitely see a lot more mainstream doctors coming to this subject and realizing, yeah, gut health really matters.  
**[0:39:04-0:39:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:39:04):**  Yes. And it's you know, it is a reflection of all of our health, as Ayurveda says, right? All health begins and ends in the gut.  And I think a lot of a lot more doctors are coming to that conclusion.  Yeah, luckily. Thank goodness. So the more the merrier.  
**[0:39:24-0:39:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:39:24):**  So I'm going to need to do like one of my goals is to have more health care leaning people join us on the show, going through the winter and really try to, you know, tap into that.  It's it's kind of it is a little bit shocking that it can be kind of harder than you think to find those people, especially from the mainstream.  And I know that I know there's a huge opportunity there. So I'm going to really put that out into the universe for those who are listening.  
**[0:39:51-0:40:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:39:51):**  If you know any passionate medical people that are in the like more conventional medical world, but starting to lean into regenerative, I'd like to talk to them.  Those are people that I'd really like to kind of harness and and get them talking and sharing in their circles, because I think that's a really important segment.  So, you know, as far as you know, we've talked about how people can get involved at the consumer level, which is great.  
**[0:40:16-0:40:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:40:16):**  And, you know, like in our final moments, I always like to like kind of bring it down to this whole like regenerative design process.  Like how do we start every day, you know, building a world that really is regenerative by design.  Like we lay down some foundational things that actually like become like flywheels for regeneration, because a lot of that regenerative energy is that it's self-perpetuating.  
**[0:40:42-0:41:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:40:42):**  And, you know, you look through the systems of what we need to do and you're actively working in that, which is fantastic.  So like, you know, really, what are the things that you're seeing and what's giving you hope for the future right now?  Well, organizations like the one I mentioned with health professionals is giving me a lot of hope.  
**[0:41:01-0:41:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:41:01):**  Regeneration in and of itself is giving me so much hope because, you know, I see an awareness really growing around it.  Like I said, it was mentioned in the top 27.  And, you know, just the calls are just getting more and more frequent and louder and louder about regeneration.  
**[0:41:20-0:41:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:41:20):**  And, you know, it's very biblical. You talk about foundational foods.  It's a biblical way of looking at ourselves as a part of nature.  So, you know, I've been vegan. I've been, you know, I've cut out fish.  
**[0:41:38-0:42:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:41:38):**  I've cut out, you know, I've tried so many different diets, but nothing fully clicked for me until regeneration because it's just, it just makes good sense.  If we continue to be able to make food for generations to come and have that land and be stewards of the land, then, you know, regeneration is our one and only option.  And I feel that nature is telling us that and that people are starting to listen.  
**[0:42:12-0:42:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:42:12):**  When I was at Instagram, you would have people writing to us from Africa, people writing to us from Asia, all over, you know, just wanting to know how they can get involved.  So the movement is bigger and it's growing. And I just have a lot of hope for that's concerned.  Yeah, me too. Yeah, that's fantastic.  
**[0:42:36-0:42:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:42:36):**  So if our listeners want to reach out to you to learn more or, you know, see if they can, you know, talk to you or learn more about your work, where can they find you?  Where's the best place to learn more about Vivian?  So I'm pretty analog when it comes to these things, but I am on Instagram at nutritionwithamission underscores between the two words.  
**[0:42:58-0:43:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:42:58):**  And if you want to drop me a line, reach me.  Cool. Fantastic.  Well, thank you so much for joining us. I appreciate you taking the time and sharing your journey with our listeners.  
**[0:43:17-0:43:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:43:17):**  And yeah, I feel like this is just the beginning of really trying to steer this focus hard on food as medicine and how Regenerative Ag can be transformative to not only just nutrition, but like to overall health and in the health of public health in general.  So this has been great. Thank you so much.  So much for having me.  
**[0:43:38-0:43:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:43:38):**  Yeah.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  
**[0:43:54-0:44:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0c03c49c#t=0:43:54):**  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry.  We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  Learn more about our work at Snacktivist Foods dot com.  