---
title: Rethinking Commodities And California Agriculture In A Changing World With Claudia Carter
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-04-29)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Claudia Carter  

**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:00:26):**  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  
**[0:00:52-0:01:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:00:52):**  Hello and thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we are getting to the root of many important topics,  from food to agriculture to climate to rural economics. And today we have an amazing guest.  I'm so pleased to be here actually in person at the California Wheat Commission with Claudia Carter.  
**[0:01:13-0:01:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:01:13):**  So Claudia, thanks for joining us.  Thank you, Joni. Thank you for having me here. I'm so excited to talk to you.  Yeah, we'll meet you in person too.  
**[0:01:21-0:01:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:01:21):**  Yeah, it's actually I think after after COVID in the last couple of years to actually be face to face across the table with somebody instead of in a Zoom box feels really, really refreshing.  Yeah.  So I'm really glad that I could, you know, not only take some time out of your day to do this, but also to get to tour the lab and meet your team and learn more about what you're doing here.  
**[0:01:42-0:01:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:01:42):**  And I was wondering if just to kick off our discussion today, if you could tell our listeners about you, because you have a really fascinating background.  I would love for you to tell a little bit about your personal story and then how you came to work here at the California Wheat Commission and what work you're doing here.  So I think that we could fill the podcast up with just that. But go ahead and take it away and and let us know about your journey.  
**[0:02:06-0:02:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:02:06):**  Yeah, so I'm originally from Ecuador. And then I'm from a coastal city called Manta. I was actually interested in food my, you know, my whole life I've been cooking on a little stool, standing up since I'm little and my mom, my grandma will come and say to my mom,  hey, you know, are you worried that she will burn or she will like hurt herself? And my mom is like, no, she got it. She's fine. So they always allow me to do experiments in the kitchen. I also, you know, became interested in food science in high school when I was interested actually in engineering courses.  And I thought, well, but I don't want to be a, my dad wanted me to be a chemical engineer. And I thought, no, I don't want to do that. However, I found out that you can mix food and engineering and there was this career that was just emerging out there, food engineering.  
**[0:02:59-0:03:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:02:59):**  So that's, that's how I started. I went to Argentina where I studied studying food engineering. And then a couple years later, I decided to move to the US because I wanted to learn English at the same time when I was doing my career learning.  So I went to North Dakota State University, studied food science, and then I did my master's in cereal science there. And then after that, I graduated in 2014, I was given the opportunity to come to the California Wheat Commission, which is the only state wheat commission in the US that have a quality lab on site.  Most of the wheat commissions have quality labs at the university. And I became the lab director back then and then the executive director in 2016. My passion for wheat, for food, definitely started at North Dakota State University with the wheat lab, where I started to understand that wheat was just not an all-purpose flour, but there was a lot more to wheat.  
**[0:03:54-0:04:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:03:54):**  And then coming to California and learning a lot more about the variables that come into the environment and variables that bring that to the wheat table. It's amazing because we can grow pretty much all the type of classes of wheat that are grown in the US here.  So yeah, that's how I ended up here and has led me to meet amazing farmers, people in the industry, in the milling and baking industry, people who also are interested in nutrition, of course, that too. So I've been meeting people from really all over the world thanks to this job. So I really love it.  Yeah, it really puts you in a unique position to have a rub with people across sectors and in many different industries from diet, nutrition to milling, like you said, manufacturing, but also out in the field working with agronomists, farmers, soil scientists and beyond.  
**[0:04:49-0:05:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:04:49):**  So I must say that that's probably one of the highlights of your work is just all the diversity of people. A couple of things I'd like you just to talk about is the fact that you're working on your PhD right now.  And you do have a focus on nutrition. And I think for many people who are on the, you know, really, there's a strange phenomenon in the United States where we have nutrition, we have farming, and we have health care, seldom are all these people at the same table talking about the same thing.  I find it really fascinating that you're in the cereal sciences and in the, you know, really more of the agricultural side, but with a very focused study and practice in nutrition.  
**[0:05:33-0:05:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:05:33):**  And I'm a nurse. So obviously, I'm always interested in how nutrition affects health. Tell us a little bit about that part of your journey and where you're at in your schooling.  Yeah. So my journey to, I actually was never interested in studying nutrition. In fact, when I was coming to the US, they gave me, I went through the process where they say, give us three different majors that you would like to study.  Of course, food science, and then it was microbiology and then nutrition at the bottom. Because I wasn't really interested in that aspect.  
**[0:06:06-0:06:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:06:06):**  I was just more interested in making food that was good for people, just as good as texture wise. How I came to appreciate the nutrition aspect is when I realized after understanding, I think you do have to dig really deep into a food system before you understand it so well that you're like, you see what's wrong with it.  So once I understood about the meal industry, the wheat market, how the farmers work, how the breeders work, but then how the milling and the baking industry work as a commodity market.  And then you see what actually is wrong in our health and our nutrition as Western diets happen. Then you understand what happened and what is going wrong.  
**[0:06:50-0:07:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:06:50):**  So my moment of like, this is what I want to do was actually, and where I realized there's something wrong here is when I was working with actually kids.  So we have a connection here with a school that they were growing greens and they came knocking on the door and say, hey, we're growing wheat, but we don't know what to do with it afterwards.  And we want to teach kids about the process of harvesting greens and then milling them, but we don't have those tools. So I said, we have all those tools. So we partner.  
**[0:07:20-0:07:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:07:20):**  And then we did this amazing process where we brought the kids in here and then we allow them to bring the wheat they harvested, they mill it here and then we make products with it.  So we made a hundred percent whole grain pasta, tortillas and bread. And then of course, a snack for them to go home, which is a chocolate chip cookie.  Most of the people that lives in Woodland are, or at least the kids that go to the school, 85% to 90% are Mexican American.  
**[0:07:48-0:07:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:07:48):**  So their diet is mostly probably based on tortillas. That's what they eat.  So these children that were here and then as we were getting these hundred percent whole tortillas and they were trying it, there was a curse of kids saying, I love this. This is the best tortilla I have ever had.  So then I started thinking, well, oftentimes you hear that the kids don't like whole grain things and that they reject them.  
**[0:08:11-0:08:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:08:11):**  Here I have all these 25 kids saying that they love this tortilla. Then what are we doing wrong? What's going on that they are liking it?  So that's when you got me actually start to think about the nutrition aspect that they tell you that you need to eat fruits and vegetables and whole grains.  Sometimes they say that and emphasize it, but what we have available is not specifically all the hundred percent whole grain products that we like to have.  
**[0:08:37-0:08:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:08:37):**  And yeah, sometimes those products are not necessarily the best quality.  So then there's something there, the disconnection between a consumer and the farmer and the nutrition and yes, the health system that you're describing.  But it all should come together and be seated on the one table and try to fix it, but that doesn't happen or rarely happens.  
**[0:09:00-0:09:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:09:00):**  But I also realized to make a system change where you're actually leading a food system to be healthy from the soil up, you have to have all these people on the table.  You have to have the policy makers, you have to have the people making the food and the farmers that we're all talking about. How can I make something as a raw material?  How can we process it and how can we make the best product out of it that we're actually aiming for the same goal?  
**[0:09:29-0:09:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:09:29):**  Right. Yeah. When we really put the end goal at the center of the table and then have everybody around the table discussing their challenges,  we're really looking at them depending on what they're up against, because it's different for each of the segments.  But then you're unified around one central goal. Suddenly getting through all the hurdles to solve the problems seems much easier because it's like this collaborative approach.  
**[0:09:53-0:10:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:09:53):**  And we're up against current American culture, which has decided to just shun pretty much the entire green category kind of in the pop culture diet trend world.  And I often thought that was really sad, but it is really grown out of the fact that so much of what our CPG consumer packaged good grocery store brands deliver is really highly processed,  core quality wheat based products. And I think that that's really been done a disservice to the role of whole grains in the diet.  
**[0:10:25-0:10:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:10:25):**  So I love that you guys are working on bringing back a lot of biodiversity, not only with, you know, working with the processing, which is really, really important, but starting at the farmer level with the breeders, the farmers,  looking at the impact from the soil up. You have done a ton of work with biodiversity in wheats and small cereals as well.  Could you tell our listeners a little bit about that journey and what who you've been working with and what you've been doing?  
**[0:10:53-0:11:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:10:53):**  Yeah, so, well, in the past, we used to test mainly the varieties and the wheat types that were going to, you know, the large scale production.  But then a couple of years ago, we started working with a small grain farmers, organic, also some that practice virgin narrative.  One of them is actually here in the Sacramento Valley called Fritz Durst. Fritz uses, you know, rotational crops, minimum tillage.  
**[0:11:22-0:11:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:11:22):**  So he could actually use that nitrogen from, let's say, legumes so he can plant weed afterwards, for example, so he can use that out.  And I do have another farmer at sales who actually grows also weed in that scenario organically.  And I will say also regenerative, sometimes you definitely you can have both.  
**[0:11:44-0:11:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:11:44):**  So then what we have seen and how we look at the diversity is not only on the aspects of quality, what we are testing.  We decided to test here. Usually we test white flower for quality, but we decided to move away with that because it's actually easier and simplified.  If you take the grain and grind it as a whole grain and then we actually have work on, we're still working on developing an easier path to test quality.  
**[0:12:10-0:12:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:12:10):**  That is going to be just two or three tests rather than usually in the weed quality, we test five to 10 different quality aspects of it.  So those two or three aspects of the weed quality, which are mix and grab and segmentation, can tell us a lot about the bakeability, like how is it going to bake.  But we are not. So how in the commodity world, marketing weed works is that you put weed in boxes.  
**[0:12:36-0:12:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:12:36):**  And those are based a lot of times on just protein content and then maybe test weight, thousand ton of weight and something else.  Is it clean? Is it dirty? And then with that, they give it and say, okay, high protein, good for bread.  However, how we're approaching here, because there's so much variability in what they're growing, organic, regenerative farmers, is rather than saying it has, it's often going to come in a lower protein.  
**[0:13:02-0:13:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:13:02):**  So people have to take, if you're working with farmers that are in that world, you have to take that mindset of working with grading weed as a commodity world.  You have to take that mindset off, like shut it off. And that's what's really the hardest thing to do.  Now you can work with regenerative farming, organic, and how you can help them is actually what we do is select varieties that work for them.  
**[0:13:27-0:13:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:13:27):**  And the varieties that work for those systems and how they work is because genetically speaking, they actually have higher quality genes.  So I give you an example with a variety called WestRent 9229.  That variety has been grown on their conventional systems with the maximum nitrogen fertilizer and water management.  
**[0:13:47-0:13:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:13:47):**  And that same variety has been worked on organic systems with very low to minimal input and has given low protein.  So we have a 14% protein and a 89% protein that we have seen the same variety.  That variability in a normal system, they would have actually rejected that bred weed on the 9% and say this is not suitable, just on the protein and the 14% okay, this is good.  
**[0:14:13-0:14:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:14:13):**  Not only that, the farmer gets discounted, that means that they get, you know, they actually get taken away some money and the 14%, 50% gets a premium for that.  However, when we bake those, the bread out of those two, the bread was actually equal in quality.  And we have actually baked 9% protein weed that is actually better than a 15, 14% protein weed that is not suitable for bread.  
**[0:14:39-0:14:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:14:39):**  Wow.  So that's a, that's a paradigm changer when you look at the shaping of market demand and incentivization at a farming level.  Because so much of what farmers are doing is to deliver to the expectations of the commodity market so that they're making the profits they need to stay in business.  
**[0:14:57-0:15:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:14:57):**  But what you're saying right now really changes the whole value system intrinsic in rating bread that if we take a little deeper dive and look at a little more than just the protein level.  We start looking at quality and then, you know, all the other nutrients that are present, it really kind of changes the value spectrum in wheat as a market.  That's a, that's a game changing concept when you think about it from a big, big systems level.  
**[0:15:27-0:15:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:15:27):**  And you are actually helping the farmer in a way that nobody else is helping them because when companies want to work with regenerative farmers, organic farmers, they're expecting to receive the same quality as conventional.  Well, then why are you in this area?  Like, no.  
**[0:15:45-0:15:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:15:45):**  And when you also talk about consistency, you expect, actually you should be expecting less consistency, which is totally normal because what is consistent in a soil system?  You know, what is consistent in an environment that changes not only, even within, within its own region, you have microclimates, right?  So what you have to be really good at is actually making sure you understand the raw material.  
**[0:16:09-0:16:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:16:09):**  The genetic part is going to be the most important aspect of that because 30% in wheat, at least 30% the variability comes from the genetics.  So if you have a good variety selection partnership with a university or with some entity, then you can select those varieties, you can do test trials and that's a partnership with the farmer.  See which varieties work better for their systems.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:16:30):**  At the end, the farmer that is in farm A, but then the farmer that's farm B next to it and might be slightly more rain, just a couple miles away.  I don't know if different areas could be that.  The varieties that work for farmer A and B are going to be different.  
**[0:16:46-0:16:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:16:46):**  Right. And the terroir and the flavor.  And, you know, we've often compared this whole grain assance to really what happened to wines.  You know, you look at early in the California wine industry, globally California wines were not revered as being, you know, competitors to European wines or, you know, other famous wine regions.  
**[0:17:09-0:17:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:17:09):**  And it was when they really took a focus and really moved away. Italy has a similar story where they were like, no, we're going to specialize on regional specificity.  Find the varieties that grow here and we can elevate the special qualities.  It really differentiated them into being more specialty premium and not just commodity, like what's going to go into the factory and make like the cheapest, most, you know, less variable product.  
**[0:17:38-0:17:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:17:38):**  And that's from an economic perspective in the food system.  You know, that's a that's a really formative experience because everybody knows what Wonder Bread is.  But when you look at a boutique bakery or even, say, a health food store that has an in-house bakery, there is such a variety in quality and such a variety in nutritional quality, too.  
**[0:18:02-0:18:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:18:02):**  So I love that you guys are doing that work as a state commission.  I think that's really admirable. Yeah.  So with the farmers you're working with, I know you have a real passion working with the smaller the smaller farmers.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:18:16):**  Do you work with any really large wheat farmers right now with your small cereals focus, trying to get them to do some adaptation to changing climate?  I know right now California is really in the crosshairs of rapidly changing water availability.  I mean, California has been a drought for a long time, but the severity has just gotten to a whole nother level.  
**[0:18:40-0:18:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:18:40):**  And I'm wondering what you guys are doing to help your farmers respond to that with a resilient model.  Yes. So that is where variety selection also comes very important.  We are I'll say I'll give all the credit to Dr. Mark Lundy at UC Davis.  
**[0:18:56-0:19:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:18:56):**  So he's our small grains specialist who is working and we have been doing this research for now three years.  I think we're about to publish or they're publishing some research done on these and also in Treaty of Calin on wheat,  where they put some varieties under stress, nitrogen stress, but also drought stress.  
**[0:19:16-0:19:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:19:16):**  And we do see that certain varieties actually respond better to those things.  And not only that, but with lower nitrogen also bake well.  And that's where actually, even though we have worked with these varieties, I was mentioning before with some of our organic, organic regenerative farmers,  
**[0:19:32-0:19:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:19:32):**  they have put it on their test trials and that same variety I was telling you before actually has performed the best.  So it's something that we're seeing. And so, yes, to respond to your question, yes.  Now, we are trying to figure out how to make this message more loud and clear to farmers,  
**[0:19:50-0:19:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:19:50):**  especially with the new rules of where there is going to be a sustainable water act in California called Sigma,  where certain land in California is going to be restricted from water.  So, however, what I think it's interesting what Mark Lundy is doing is saying that those fields might actually go fallow.  
**[0:20:10-0:20:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:20:10):**  But he is also doing research on how fallow farming or fallow areas, soil is actually not good for the environment.  What I'd rather do is cover crop and where grains come as a cover crop is amazing.  And some of those farmers were telling them, hey, if you do have an amazing crop, here are the varieties that you can work better in those regions with minimum input and minimum water.  
**[0:20:33-0:20:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:20:33):**  You still, I mean, nothing grows without water. You're still going to need like, I think he was saying like about four to six inches of water will be ideal,  but you can still get okay of crop if it's a little bit less than four inches of water.  And then because they won't have any water available for irrigation, so they're just dealing with whatever comes that year.  
**[0:20:51-0:20:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:20:51):**  If you do have a crop, then hey, let's make it work where we can test it.  But also, I mean, they're talking about how they can silage that, but without having that fallow because it's the worst.  Yeah, fallow is dangerous. I don't think people realized that from a soil degradation standpoint,  
**[0:21:08-0:21:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:21:08):**  how serious that can be, especially in an area that's suffering from the desertification process.  And, you know, just the fallout from that fallow, you know, period can be disastrous from soil levels.  So there are so many fantastic grains in particular, but, you know, pulses and other crops that can be planted and still produce a yield of something.  
**[0:21:32-0:21:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:21:32):**  Right. And under really terrible, terrible circumstances. So I love that you guys are working with farmers, probably reaching out beyond your typical, you know, grain belt people,  but people that are losing, having to take down orchards or other specialty crops that are just having to call it quits because of water access.  Right. It's a really powerful notion. And I think for me, it's another powerful notion behind the concept of the consumer rally behind grains as a food group.  
**[0:22:01-0:22:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:22:01):**  But in a changing climate and with global scarcity, food scarcity concerns, you know, grains, there's a reason why grains have been associated with strong civilizations for many, many years.  It's that you have to have that reserve of food. We need to really rekindle the quality of our grains rather than just pretending we don't need them. Does that make sense?  Yeah. And I think you guys are doing the right work to bring that conversation to light. Now with these fallow areas, are they looking to bring in more regenerative approach, you said with the cover cropping and minimizing tillage, but are they bringing in any animal integration there?  
**[0:22:40-0:22:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:22:40):**  I have no idea about that aspect. I would think so. But depending how proximate they are, especially from the dairy area,  it might be, I know there are certain farmers who do bring their cattle to grazing in certain regions and they transport them.  But I don't know how that is related to the mass industry that we have in California.  
**[0:23:06-0:23:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:23:06):**  It's more challenging here, I think, because there's a lot of population for one.  I know a lot of regenerative farmers in my neck of the woods like Eastern Washington, Idaho, and then in the Midwest where there are in a thousand mile radius, there are fewer people than there are in a 50 mile radius here.  And so when you look at widespread animal integration and that kind of regenerative model, it's awesome philosophically, but when you look at it, butting up against neighborhoods and butting up against other municipal things, it just becomes much more complicated.  
**[0:23:41-0:23:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:23:41):**  You can't just go, oh, yeah, just throw some cattle out there and it will fix everything. It's like, well, it's actually a little bit more complicated than that.  So one of my personal interest points is like, how can we bring in more aggressive, robust biodiversity rotation programs to help augment that soil without, you know, I mean, it's great to have animals, but if it's not possible, there are a lot of great things we can do.  And I think for people to hear that story, they're like, oh, cool, there is stuff we can do.  
**[0:24:09-0:24:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:24:09):**  You know, they don't feel like they've failed before they've even gotten started.  It's an interesting process. So biodiversity with nutrition, you know, when you look at what most people think about is flower, let's get back to wheat.  And I'm one of those nerdy wheat people where I've literally like traveled North Africa finding the ancient Cossores and like the granaries of the Berbers.  
**[0:24:34-0:24:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:24:34):**  And wheat has a very fascinating historical story. And it's not to be underestimated here in the United States. Most people, when they think flower, the only thing they know of white flower is all purpose, which isn't even all just wheat.  It's got barley flower in there as well. How do you guys see the consumer adoption and the consumer education around understanding wheat flower beyond all purpose?  Well, I want to touch on what you say about the history of it. I think it's interesting to me when I found out that from our breeder, Dr. Jorge Dukovsky, how, you know, most of our meat comes from this ancestral emmerweed and then einform, which are the oldest ones that we know that are still here.  
**[0:25:22-0:25:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:25:22):**  And there are probably a lot more wild types that are, you know, grown. However, what I think was interesting how, you know, humans have been talking or dealing with the things about nutrition and grains, how emmerweed, einkorn, if you look at them, they actually are yellow.  And over the years, for many, many years as, you know, crossing varieties and changing them how they are because of what consumers expect to receive, for years, they started actually crossing them and then that yellowness was facing out.  So what we today know as common breed or have red springweed or winterweed, that is actually when you scrape off the brand, you see the white flower, it actually is because over the years, breeders intentionally have been actually selected for varieties and crossing them to remove that yellowness.  
**[0:26:17-0:26:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:26:17):**  Interesting.  And then the one that is the closest to the emmer einkorn is actually durum, which the yellowness is desirable for its pasta and couscous.  Now, when we talk about nutrition, you think about what you're removing out of this some phytochemicals too, and some of those, you know, lutein, the carotenoid pigments that are good for you.  
**[0:26:38-0:26:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:26:38):**  Now, you know, as you want to make, they wanted to make wider the better because white was recognized as higher social status, they remove something very important that our ancestors of the weed ancestor had.  So that's one interesting thing to think about when we talk about nutrition and what has happened over the years.  And the next thing that to me is interesting how one time talking with our breeder say that he has had meetings with millers and oftentimes he hears these like, we want weeds that have lower ash.  
**[0:27:12-0:27:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:27:12):**  Well, when you ask to have a weed with lower ash, which that means that you're asking to have less minerals and vitamins.  So because ash is actually a measurement of the minerals that are there.  So how you do that is, of course, you remove the brand, you remove most of those minerals and vitamins are there, and then you're left with endosperm that have less minerals, that means less nutrition.  
**[0:27:35-0:27:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:27:35):**  So because ash in the white world is seen as a bad thing for the bread baking.  So and then he was like, how can I do that? You cannot ask me to make weed less unhealthy.  Yeah, philosophical problem.  
**[0:27:51-0:27:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:27:51):**  Yeah. So then that also comes to explain people how, yes, what we have in the stores is all white flour, what you know.  But out of that white flour, as you say, there's not only weed, there's a little bit of some other things that are added, but it's a mix of varieties.  I mean, at the end of the day, they're mixing different varieties, different weed types to make it to what is called purpose flour.  
**[0:28:13-0:28:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:28:13):**  I was taught by my Dr. Shanae Shymchick in my baking class, she say for us, all purpose flour equals no purpose flour.  What that means is that when we're making a product, especially when you're making it as an industrial, you need to know how that flour is going to behave.  You could have all purpose flour on the East Coast that is a much lower protein and much more like a biscuity type of all purpose flour, even though it doesn't say that.  
**[0:28:39-0:28:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:28:39):**  Or you could have one more in the PNW that's an all purpose flour that might be a higher protein and more suitable for bread types.  So that's why I mean all purpose flour doesn't mean that it's going to be for everything suitable.  It's just kind of like a convenience thing for them to have in there so people can take it and make anything.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:29:00):**  But you cannot make the best bread out of that all purpose flour.  You can't, especially if you're trying to make more artisanal bread.  Exactly.  
**[0:29:07-0:29:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:29:07):**  It does not perform. So I feel like we could we could probably fill up hours of podcasting on all these different things we've talked about today.  But I know you've got some exciting things going on later today.  And we're going to wrap it up. But I do want us to just kind of take it back to you think about consumers that are listening to this.  
**[0:29:26-0:29:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:29:26):**  And they're like, boy, I'm not in the food industry. I'm not in the ag industry.  What can I do? Like what are action items that consumers can do that would help drive this renaissance in the grain sector?  I think the one thing that I also became interested in working with, you know, supporting local farmers, small sized farmers, and even larger farmers that say I want to be part of that.  
**[0:29:51-0:30:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:29:51):**  Is that when you are well, first of all, if you have a farmers farmers market and then there is a, you know, bread that they sell there or any wheat based product, ask them, like, do you know your farmer?  Are you using 100% whole grains?  That's one way to do it. Also, there are tons of small bakeries popping up throughout the US.  
**[0:30:11-0:30:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:30:11):**  Clothage bakeries are becoming more popular. So support a local baker who, you know, I'll say the champions of this industry, in my view, to make sure that they educate consumers and who have been doing a lot of the heavy lifting have been our local bakers.  Because they are right there face to face to the consumer and the consumers are asking them tons of questions.  And they're the ones who I know have been super supportive of finding local grains. Even sometimes it's really complicated.  
**[0:30:44-0:30:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:30:44):**  So what they have to figure out how to bring it to their bread. So they have actually become even millers.  I have a couple examples. I mean, Dave Miller, Apichiko, he makes the breads 100% whole wheat. He actually came from North Dakota, you know, where I went to school.  So he would tell me like he had to learn what varieties are suitable here and what he can use.  
**[0:31:04-0:31:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:31:04):**  So he's one of those juicy bakeries. Also, he has a mill and he also does this 100% whole wheat.  I can tell you many, many of those. So I'll say find out who are your local bakers, ask them questions.  I also I'll say one thing will be really fun and I do it all the time.  
**[0:31:21-0:31:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:31:21):**  When you have a restaurant that says farm to fork restaurant, always ask them because you probably want to have a pasta dish.  There's going to be some wheat or grain based product. And it gets left out of the equation. Exactly.  So I say always ask them this. Oh, you're a farm to fork and you know, I want your pasta dish.  
**[0:31:41-0:31:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:31:41):**  Say where does the flour that you put in your pasta, where does that come from? Because that's farm to fork.  They'll always give you this look like what are you talking about? It's just wheat, it's flour. Exactly.  And I love asking that question because I want them to think about that. Are they truly farm to fork?  
**[0:31:59-0:32:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:31:59):**  And the same thing goes with products that when they talk about regenerative.  And I've had conversations before where people say I want to make this product regenerative.  But then they look at how complicated it is to bring that product because there's not a mill that is milling that kind of flour.  
**[0:32:17-0:32:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:32:17):**  And they have to go out of the way and talk to the farmer. Actually, sometimes they take shortcuts. I actually have seen that most of the time.  So it really bothers me to see that because they see it how complicated. But if it was easy, everybody will be doing it.  And if you want to change things, make sure that you look at the product even on the shelf.  
**[0:32:35-0:32:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:32:35):**  And then do they have something that tells you like what are they taking the steps?  And oftentimes they have to go baby steps. You cannot just go and change it all because it's hard.  Are they showing you or telling you a story that they're doing something toward this goal?  
**[0:32:50-0:32:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:32:50):**  Yeah. Read the labels. I'll say always make sure that things that you're buying are whole grain, whole grain.  They have a lot more character to it, but also they're really good for you.  Absolutely. So you have so many cool things going on. You are a mom also. And so you're raising kids.  
**[0:33:07-0:33:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:33:07):**  What gives you hope for the future?  I love that. So my kids have grown into me. I love cooking. Like love cooking more than baking. Baking I'm OK.  But one of the things that warmed my heart is like I made lasagna. I was sick for a couple of weeks and then I got sick and then got sick.  
**[0:33:30-0:33:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:33:30):**  And I told my husband, say, just just get that that lasagna pasta.  Look at it. Because I often make it my own. The lasagna noodle pasta. So I can make and they love my lasagna.  So and when I put it in front of them with that lasagna, with that pasta from the store that I made, my kids were like,  
**[0:33:48-0:33:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:33:48):**  Mom, this is different. This is not the same lasagna. And then I like there's something besides I say, yeah, I have to use this lasagna.  It's like, well, I like your lasagna better. So how I do mine is I use 100 percent iron corn flour for Christmas and all and make it myself.  Takes time to be honest. But yes, it yields this amazing.  
**[0:34:06-0:34:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:34:06):**  What it gives me hope how kids can learn to appreciate good food and healthy food, because this is again, it's made with 100 percent whole grain iron corn.  Yeah. And they actually start picking on those differences. They taste that they actually can pick.  So, yeah, for me, it's easy to say because I love cooking, but I do know that their moms out there, they're just like cooking is not for me.  
**[0:34:29-0:34:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:34:29):**  Right. But they don't have time. But that's when you can actually hopefully find, you know, brands like yourself that can partner up and say, I really like what they're doing.  And I want my kids to do have that. And it's time to do those products. Don't think that these products are just for adults.  Because sometimes people think, oh, my kid only eats mac and cheese. Have you ever asked him to try a little bit of this other dish?  
**[0:34:56-0:35:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:34:56):**  Or this salmon? And do baby steps. If you get them accustomed since they're very little to all these complex flavors, my kids love octopus.  They love fish because I've been feeding them since they're very little. They are not going to say no.  So it really is bringing them up to the best health possible with the fruits and vegetables, the whole grains and everything else that you can give it to them.  
**[0:35:22-0:35:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:35:22):**  Just give it to them since they're little.  Yeah. And even if they go through their little rebellious teenager phase where they're like, I don't want to eat that food, mom. I'm going to eat the stuff you never let me have.  And then they're like, oh, I don't I don't feel so good after eating that.  
**[0:35:36-0:35:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:35:36):**  You know, like the novelty is still there and they want to be rebellious or exploratory.  But then they're like, gosh, that really was overrated. Like we actually really rather have just mom's homemade granola crunch food is what they call it.  My kids anyway, it's like mom's granola food. So I love that because it gives me hope to see in a whole new generation of kids that are open minded to what food can be.  
**[0:36:01-0:36:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:36:01):**  And they can taste the difference between the high quality made with love and the stuff is just the factory commodity.  And to me, that's that those are the foods that are driving our health care problems, mental health problems.  A lot of things that we're up against in society. And it's amazing to think that food and sitting around and sharing a good meal with somebody can be at the heart of a solution to huge, huge problems.  
**[0:36:26-0:36:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:36:26):**  Yeah. And talk to them. I mean, they listen. Oh, my goodness. They listen so much.  I had a friend of my daughter sitting on the table the other day saying I made a promise to my mom to be eating more fruits and vegetables because my my you know, my uncle almost died because he had a clock and because he was not eating well.  So then I'm going to make sure I don't go through that. So I want to stay healthy. They are listening. Talk to them about those things. Don't think that they won't understand. They will understand.  
**[0:36:54-0:37:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:36:54):**  I agree. That's awesome. So I'm sure that our listeners want to learn more about what you're doing. Where is the best place for them to go to like keep up with all of your projects?  I'm most active on LinkedIn. So I'm a Clowdy Carter there.  You can find us on LinkedIn for those of you who are listening is so much fun. So you need to follow Claudia.  
**[0:37:16-0:37:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:37:16):**  Thank you. And I'm also active on our Instagram. So California wheat. And also I have a project going on. If you want to look into what we're doing at schools, it's at wheat to school. That's our other link. Instagram account.  We'll make sure that we post those in the show notes for everybody. I know a lot of our listeners will be really enthusiastic and especially the week to school program. I think, you know, that is a whole nother topic we could talk about is early education, school health, like, you know, just focusing on children. So maybe we'll have to do a part two.  Definitely.  
**[0:37:51-0:37:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:37:51):**  Yeah. We'll invite Sian to join us on that one. So Claudia, thank you so much. I appreciate it.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast. If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry. We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  
**[0:38:31-0:38:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/b541ad11#t=0:38:31):**  Learn more about our work at SnacktivistFoods.com.  