---
title: Soil Science And Regenerative Agriculture With Ray Archuleta
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-10-27)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Ray Archuleta  

**[0:00:00-0:00:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast,  where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore.  I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities  
**[0:00:23-0:00:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:00:23):**  behind the regenerative food system movement.  Food is the connection between people and planet.  In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war  have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:00:44):**  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design  can create a more resilient system.  Okay, hello everybody and thank you so much for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  Today we have a guest that I have been wanting to have on for so long  because he's somebody who is very instrumental in helping shape the way I look at regenerative systems.  
**[0:01:09-0:01:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:01:09):**  We have Mr. Ray Arceletta here joining us today. Welcome, Ray.  Hi, Joni. Thank you for saying all those kind things. I'll pay you later.  Thank you. You're very gracious.  Yeah, you can Venmo me. No, this is fantastic because I know you are such a busy guy.  You've got so many irons in the fire and for you to take time out today and join us  
**[0:01:30-0:01:35](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:01:30):**  as we talk about your work and what has shaped your experiences to make you who you are today  is just such an honor, so thank you.  Thank you, Joni.  Yeah, to get started, because I'm assuming a lot of our listeners might be a little familiar with your work,  especially with being on Kiss the Ground, I think was a real exposure point for people who aren't really necessarily working in agriculture  
**[0:01:53-0:01:58](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:01:53):**  and food to know about what you do and what an agronomist is.  I think a lot of people are just starting to drink from a fire hose about learning about the bigger system  that brings food to our plates.  I would love for you to just kind of kick off the day today telling us a little bit about your background,  where you grew up, why you went into the studies you did of soil science and agriculture and what you do today.  
**[0:02:19-0:02:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:02:19):**  Thank you, Joni. Yeah, for me, it started when I was 15 years old.  I remember working at my uncle's ranch in New Mexico.  I grew up in northern New Mexico. Our family's been there for 400 or 500 years.  We've been there for a long time.  I'll never forget working on the ranch. I just absolutely loved working on the ranch and being outside.  
**[0:02:40-0:02:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:02:40):**  I think that started my career.  Then I told my dad, I said, Dad, I think I'm going to go get a degree in agriculture.  I'll never forget, I went to a couple of years at community college and then graduated from there in livestock science  and then did a couple of years in the Peace Corps, believe it or not, in Guatemala and Costa Rica.  Wow.  
**[0:03:01-0:03:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:03:01):**  Yeah, I did a couple of years there.  I didn't know that.  Yeah, it was great. A great experiment.  That's so cool.  I learned a lot and then it was interesting.  
**[0:03:10-0:03:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:03:10):**  I picked up Spanish and I could not speak Spanish at the house because I had a speech impediment, believe it or not, as a kid.  So I had to go relearn Spanish.  Back in the early 70s, you weren't allowed to speak Spanish in the school system.  You only could speak English.  So I went and graduated and then I came back from Peace Corps, picked up a Y from Missouri and then went back to college.  
**[0:03:38-0:03:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:03:38):**  Joni, I do things the hard way.  Yeah, no wonder we get along.  Oh, yeah, it's kind of the hard way.  So I put six more years of college.  Guess where I landed when I graduated.  
**[0:03:53-0:03:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:03:53):**  I landed up in Missouri working with rice growers.  Wow.  Just to give everybody a little background quickly, I started my career with what used to be called Soil Conservation Service.  And that was an agency created because of the dust bowl.  We were having problems with erosion.  
**[0:04:13-0:04:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:04:13):**  Right.  And I put 30 years with them.  So my first track was five years in Missouri, five years in Oregon, and then 10 years in North Carolina and then wrapped my career up in Missouri.  But it all started down that path.  And so I put a lot of years in as an agronomist, soil health specialist, and that's how I started off working with the agency.  
**[0:04:40-0:04:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:04:40):**  And how interesting that you were able to live in such, you know, different parts of the country to actually spend time in Oregon, you know, in the Midwest, the Rocky Mountains, and also on the East Coast.  I mean, not very many people are able to take that all in.  You start to realize that there is no one way to do farming.  Every region is so different.  All the soils across the country have different characteristics.  
**[0:05:06-0:05:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:05:06):**  And it really has to, it really makes a person leverage a lot of creativity to, you know, look at those through the lens of a scientist, I think.  And, you know, try to put it all together.  You know, I think you hit a really good point here, Joni.  I think one of the things we miss, you're right.  I've been in every state from Hawaii, Puerto Rico.  
**[0:05:28-0:05:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:05:28):**  With my position in North Carolina as a soil, national soil health specialist, I got to travel in every state from Puerto Rico to Hawaii.  But, but let me, I tell you, I think this is where the change in my life started to happen.  And I think it would happen when I was living, working in Oregon and living in Idaho because I actually crossed the Snake River.  And so I lived in Idaho and Boise and you and I talked about that.  But I think it's really important for the audience to understand what happened to me.  
**[0:06:00-0:06:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:06:00):**  I think that time I was about halfway through my career and I think I was going through a state of depression because, and I was getting really down because we weren't, we weren't fixing anything.  I could see that the water was still polluted after irrigation season.  And I noticed that farmers were going broke.  And I said, we're not fixing anything.  We're spending billions and billions of dollars.  
**[0:06:21-0:06:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:06:21):**  We're giving money away.  And we're not fixing anything. Farmers are still going broke.  They're, the water's still getting unclean.  Then I finally, I think I reached a point that all of us go through these changes in our lives that we have to, I call it these butterfly effects like you and I talked about.  We, there's this little tiny things in your life that happens that change the total trajectory of your whole life.  
**[0:06:48-0:06:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:06:48):**  And I think Idaho was one of them.  And what happened was I started realizing, oh my gosh, we're not fixing anything.  And I think what changed me was in 2007, I got promoted, landed up in North Carolina.  And I got to meet Ray Stiers, Gabe Brown.  And I also got to meet a lot of the, the Burley District in North Dakota.  
**[0:07:16-0:07:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:07:16):**  But what happened is, and also one book that really changed was Ellen Savory's book, Joni.  And I don't know if you read it. It's called Holistic Management.  That book, those people at the right time, Joni, changed everything for me.  So I think that was very critical.  Yeah.  
**[0:07:36-0:07:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:07:36):**  And what happened is it taught me that we were, we taught agriculture from the wrong premise.  And what I mean by that, I was taught how to control nature.  How to use chemicals, fertilizer, tillage, manipulate it in genetics, GMOs and all that.  We got to control nature. We got to force it. We got to yield. It's working against us.  And I knew something was wrong with that because then finally at that time I realized, oh no, oh my goodness.  
**[0:08:09-0:08:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:08:09):**  It was all about the microbes. And I missed the mark.  We should have been teaching, no, emulate nature. Love it. Nurture it. Work with it. Synergize with it.  That's what I, what changed my life from that point on.  Yeah, that's fantastic because you hear this story again and again, how it's rarely one foundational event.  It's usually like a combination of conversations and, you know, actually seeing something with your own eyes where you're like, wait, it shakes the foundation of how you look at the world and what the operating system of the world is.  
**[0:08:43-0:08:54](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:08:43):**  And, you know, our modern world has been using an operating system that is intrinsically hinged on the concept of controlling nature and that we will have a mastery of it.  And unfortunately, what we're realizing, and people have known this forever, we will never win.  I mean, we can exhaust our efforts and nature will always outsmart us and win in its just sheer power.  And that's a different operating system.  And I feel like this whole regenerative movement and the shift starting with regenerative food systems and agriculture is kind of re-evaluating how we interact as humans with our system that we need to put humans back into ecosystems rather than looking at us as separate entities that are competing for turf, you know?  
**[0:09:32-0:09:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:09:32):**  Yeah, you're right.  And Joni, one of the things, the reason I use that, the concept butterfly effect, because it probably should be phrased this way, the little things matter.  The little tiny things matter.  And I picked up the concept from Edward Lorenz's book.  Well, it's Edward Lorenz and really James Glick wrote a book called Chaos.  
**[0:09:54-0:10:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:09:54):**  And his book, he talks about how can the flapping of the wings of a butterfly, moving the air molecules under it, can it create a tornado and can it?  And the answer is yes.  In biological systems, they're so interconnected.  Any tiny subtle change can have a total trajectory of the outcome, like, for example, when he uses computer model, he found out that just little nuances about parts of a thousand change in the numbers determine whether you got rain or determine when you got sun.  And you remember that?  
**[0:10:29-0:10:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:10:29):**  And so, again, these little things, what we're talking about, does it matter the way we farm?  Does it matter the way we eat?  Does it matter the ingredients we put in the answers?  Absolutely, it is.  The people you come in contact, the people meeting you, all these are subtle, beautiful things that can have a huge outcome.  
**[0:10:52-0:10:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:10:52):**  Absolutely.  I love that perspective, because I think being a kid who grew up kind of on a small farm, we weren't like a big commercial operation, but we were farming and my parents had jobs off the farm.  So, you know, different model, but, you know, raising a very conventional farming kind of mindset.  And we lived, I grew up in western Oregon, so it was very timber focused, fishing, farming, all those pieces of the puzzle coming together.  And, you know, but then my dad was quite the avid outdoorsman.  
**[0:11:21-0:11:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:11:21):**  And we spent a lot of time out like collecting wild mushrooms and hunting and, you know, really kind of he really loved subsistence living, you know, exercises.  So we spent a lot of time out there in the woods and there was always this inner conflict in me that I couldn't put my finger on that had to do with this whole nuance of like the butterfly effect.  Like every little thing we do actually does ripple through the whole system because the system is actually collaborative, not competitive in nature.  Nature is collaborative. It's symbiotic.  I'd love for you to, you know, because I've seen you speak and I have always been blown away when you do go down this path of explaining the way you look at the world.  
**[0:12:02-0:12:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:12:02):**  Because to me, I find it to be very therapeutic. Like it's very peaceful for me to think about the world through your lens, Ray.  Like it's a, it gives me hope that there's, that we can build a system that's holistic and collaborative by nature.  Yeah, I thank you for bringing that up, Joni, because I've had to learn the hard way that I was not being a good observer.  I was walking around very numb thinking, why does it matter? Does it? It was very mechanistic.  I, if you watch our schools and the way we taught, it was very linear, but nature is very non-linear.  
**[0:12:42-0:12:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:12:42):**  Joni, you were so blessed to have a parent, parents that have you walked out there.  I kind of was on my own and I started kind of realizing through this series of learning, I'm saying, oh, my goodness, this thing's elegant.  It's beautiful. It's intertwined. It's interconnected. And you know what's funny, Joni?  One of the biggest struggles I have teaching when I go teach across the country with producers,  understanding the interconnectedness of how everything is absolutely interconnected and it's elegant and it's collaborative. It does, it overall, I tell farmers, look, farmers, you and I were taught competition.  
**[0:13:22-0:13:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:13:22):**  Oh, everything's going to steal water. Everything's going to take nutrients from you. And I said, does competition happen? Yes.  It has to happen. It builds integrity in the system. But overall, she's elegant. She's collaborative. She's collaboration is more than competition.  And so I've had to go through years and years of retraining myself, Joni. That's what I had to do.  I had to all the years of drawing on the soil. I spent years retraining. And I guess you, maybe you might have to do that or maybe you're very fortunate you did have to do that.  Yeah, it's an interesting thing because I think the more linear thinking model is completely embedded in our cultural norms.  
**[0:14:05-0:14:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:14:05):**  So I think no matter how you grow up, there is a sense of having to kind of stop and pause and reevaluate those thinking patterns through that lens of observation.  And I find that soil scientists are an interesting group because soil is so microscopic.  I mean, what separates dirt from soil and all the biological activity that comes together to make that happen is is a very microscopic and very focused science.  And but soil scientists generally are a very fascinating group of people. And I did a couple of years.  I know just enough soil science to be dangerous. I worked with a guy by the name of Dr. Tom DeLuca at University of Montana, and he's now the dean of the School of Forestry at Oregon State University. Fantastic guy.  
**[0:14:49-0:15:00](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:14:49):**  But it's amazing, like the perspective you get about the natural world when you take it down to the ground level and what creates the foundation of life as we know it, which is soil.  So it's just a fantastic thing. So for you, you know, after spending all these years of studying soil and biological systems, like when and you've talked about kind of when that aha moment was.  But how is it now shifted the way you do your your discipline as a soil scientist with this new lens of like, you know, bigger picture thinking?  Good, Joni. You know what? What I was taught in college, chemistry and physics, that was the approach. Chemistry and physics.  It was always that approach. If I have a problem, chemistry and physics. If you go to the medical field, how do they approach you when you go to the doctor? Chemical, physical.  
**[0:15:40-0:15:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:15:40):**  I either got to cut it off, chemicals, or I got to do chemo. That's the way it approached. I was taught the same thing in the agriculture field.  People don't realize that the agriculture field and the medical field are brothers and sisters. And so that's how we approach biological systems.  And your expertise is in this. And we want to approach the body chemically and physically. I said, no, no, no, no, no approaches everything.  So when I approach my human body now, or any of the soil ecosystems, in fact, the soil works very similar to the human body. Very similar.  And there's a common principle, Joni, and you touched upon this, because you said, what about when you go see all these different soils and every you go to every different state, it's different, the climate's different.  
**[0:16:30-0:16:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:16:30):**  Yeah, but they all have a common pattern. They are all driven by life and biology. They work the same, believe it or not.  Yeah.  Now you have different variances about how much biology, but they're all biological systems. And I think what is amazing when I left college, Joni, I felt like, okay, the farm, I realized, well, the farm came from the forest and the prairie, and it still has the same processes.  But the way I looked at it after college, well, that's the farm. But it's not like the prairie in the forest. It was insane how we were taught. I was like, wow.  Yeah, that is so reductionistic that we actually don't apply the principles that are found in wild ecosystems to intentional ecosystems. Because like you said, the rulebook and the fundamental drivers of the biology is all the same. That's an interesting way of looking at it.  
**[0:17:31-0:17:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:17:31):**  And that's what changed me, Joni, because I started realizing I would have farmers come up to me, Joni, and say, Ray, you don't get it. It's too dry here. It's too wet. It's too cold. I would hear that all the time. You don't understand our soils.  Yeah.  And I finally came up with this response. I said, what? Do you live in Mars?  Yeah.  Are you from Mars? Is your farm from Mars? They start laughing and go, what do you mean, right? I said, it's life. Biology is the same. So you asked me, what's the lenses that I look? Ecology and biology. Biology, I talked from the plant and the microbes are life.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:18:08):**  Without the microbes, the plant, guess what we have? Geology, rock, sands.  We have deserts or Mars, like you said, without that biology piece, we may as well be Mars. Because that's what drives all of the water cycles too.  So one of the things that is, I feel like a missing piece of the puzzle in many conversations about regenerative systems is hydrology and water and the role of the water cycle.  And I'm very fascinated and inspired by a lot of the programs that you worked with with Understanding Ag and with Los Alamos Ranch and with Gabe and Dr. Allen.  And really taking a deeper dive into how by leveraging the power of nature, not working against it, we actually can, we can actually drive it in a direction that can make for more water.  
**[0:19:02-0:19:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:19:02):**  And I'm just talking about water specifically here. But to me, that's a powerful story. And my husband had never heard that story.  I told him a little bit about it, but evidently I didn't do that great of a job or you just kind of snooze through it.  But he got to hear Gabe Brown tell that story and Dr. Allen Williams at Expo West last year or just this last March.  And he was like, he was stunned for the rest of the day. He goes, I know you've tried to tell me this story and maybe I didn't listen.  But he was like, for the first time ever, I think he saw how powerful this process of regeneration can be that they've been able to successfully bring back life to a system that was essentially dying because of lack of water.  
**[0:19:45-0:19:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:19:45):**  Yeah. Yeah. You know what, Joni, I think we forget that the water cycle is biological. It's biologically driven. I've actually told...  It is.  I actually get in front of an audience now and say, okay, now I'm okay. Get in your mind. I say, get rid of every plant.  It lets you eliminate every plant, every shrub, every vegetation and strip it from the earth. I said, what do you have?  And all of a sudden, they'll ponder. You'll have rock and ice. It'd be dead.  
**[0:20:15-0:20:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:20:15):**  Life is driven by these plants and microbes. They run the water. They're part of the water cycle. They're connected.  They are.  And that's a wild thought.  It's a wild thought.  And you know what, Joni, started...  
**[0:20:32-0:20:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:20:32):**  You remember the pictures I showed you of Alejandro Carillo's, those pictures of the desert becoming...  Look, Joni, I grew up in an area where it's very arid.  And when I went to Alejandro's ranch and I came back and I go, oh, my goodness, because I kept looking for hope.  You know, when I drove from Missouri to go to Oklahoma, I mean, to New Mexico to go see my parents and I would just kind of like, you just want to start crying from the moment you get in the vehicle and you start seeing the landscape.  Yeah.  
**[0:21:03-0:21:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:21:03):**  And I said, I figure we could fix crop land. I know we could fix irrigated land real quick.  But how in the world are we going to fix our grasslands that are now deserts?  And then I found out Alejandro used life cattle, cattle only, and he was able to restore the water cycle.  Yeah, it's using life to create more life.  And like to me, that is such a powerful example of really like what can happen everywhere.  
**[0:21:37-0:21:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:21:37):**  When we're thinking about like the threat of desertification and altered water cycles globally that are, you know, severely impacting agriculture and our ability to survive as humans on this planet.  What you and Alejandro and your teams have demonstrated to me is the most powerful example of hope literally on Earth today.  Yep. And the next...  It's humbling.  Oh, it's wonderful.  
**[0:22:03-0:22:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:22:03):**  And the next Common Ground is going to be another documentary called Common Ground, Joni.  It's going to be coming out next year. And Alejandro is going to be the movie star on that one.  He's going to be... Gabe and I will show up a little bit, but they're going to show how...  Boy, you talk about hope. I tell you, people need hope.  I've had people come up to me after I've watched The Kiss the Ground and go, oh, my gosh, right?  
**[0:22:24-0:22:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:22:24):**  They start tears. Thank you for giving me hope that the planet was going to go down to the toilet.  It was going to be over. And I said, no, oh, no, we can fix this and we can heal this very quickly.  And so it's so encouraging to see that. It encouraged me because I believed Ellen Savory.  I just didn't know how we could carry it out. And now I know how we're going to be able to carry out.  Now, and this is a good kind of point to bring out here, Joni, in front of the audience is that I've told people we are not going to be able to heal the planet without cattle, without livestock,  
**[0:22:57-0:23:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:22:57):**  without herbivores. It's not going to happen. There's no way to bring those deserts back without livestock. Sorry.  It's not going to happen. And they're shocked.  Yeah. When you look at that through an ecosystem lens, however, ruminants, the role of ruminants in an intact ecosystem,  especially a savanna type ecosystem is undeniable from an ecology standpoint.  But people love to really just blame cattle for everything where I really believe it's, you know, CAFOs.  
**[0:23:31-0:23:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:23:31):**  Sure. Let's get really critical of confined animal feeding units because there's a lot to be critical of there.  But cattle in their natural environment, other ruminants in their natural environment and bringing these systems back together that have been separated through this reductionistic modern model,  which is really more of an industrial model, that's where the problems arise when we have ecosystems working functionally and layered farming systems.  It's amazing how much magic can happen. You said that beautifully, Joni. That was very well said.  And it's that mechanistic because I used to work with those huge industrial CAFOs and write the nutrient management plans and do that.  
**[0:24:15-0:24:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:24:15):**  And I never I supported that. I believe that. And now I'm saying, no, we need to change that because it's.  But we've got to help the farmer and rancher change the way. But see, people blame the farmer rancher.  And I said, no, no, no, no. We as a society chose that pattern way back.  We were having to feed huge amounts of people. It had to be very, very efficient.  And the system in the United States, I'll be honest, it's incredibly efficient, but it's incredibly destructive because it treats nature like a machine.  
**[0:24:50-0:24:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:24:50):**  And now can we transition to a better model where we fuse more ecology? Absolutely.  And that's what we're shooting for. Because and I think one thing we need to mention, Joni, real quickly is that I have a lot of people come up to me and say,  but Ray, we got to cut the chemicals and they become like chemicals are horrible.  And I said, now, careful. I said, be very careful what you're asking for.  Please understand. And when you work with soils and farmers that have been addicted to chemicals, you don't cut somebody off an addiction right away.  
**[0:25:27-0:25:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:25:27):**  You'll kill the farm and ranch. It's a it's a gradual thing.  I said, when I remember the soils are bacteria dominant, they're they're used to all these inputs.  Now I have to work with them slowly. And I always use the analogy of my father in law who died at 61 years old, chronic smoker, functional alcoholic.  And he quit right away, killed him. You don't do that. You have to work gradually.  And that's what people don't understand when you're working with systems, Joni.  
**[0:25:58-0:26:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:25:58):**  And I think a lot of the audience think that we're going to be able to do this right away or like when they said we're all going to go to electric cars.  No, no, no, no, no, no. Gradually. When people make those kind of statements, they don't understand systems thinking.  You don't do that. No, they don't. And it's funny, my mom always has said this to me my whole life because I tend to be kind of like, let's go do it, charge.  And she goes, honey, evolution will always work better than revolution because it works with the system that's in charge.  And I thought that was interesting coming from my mom. Like, but now that I'm older, you know, nearing 50, I'm like, oh, my gosh, mom is totally right.  
**[0:26:43-0:26:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:26:43):**  Like because it's a long lasting change rather than like a disruption that upsets the balance, which sometimes, you know, can be helpful for something.  But then again, it often creates chaos and it's not like lasting change where we with this, we need lasting change.  And, you know, again, correlating the brother, the brother sister combination of like agriculture and health care because, you know, coming from health care, I have seen people die of like the DTS and withdrawal from drugs and alcohol in the ICU setting.  And I agree that there is a huge parallel there where we know that that is a dangerous process.  And I see that same thing in very chemically addicted systems in ecosystems and farming and whatnot.  
**[0:27:30-0:27:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:27:30):**  We can't just pull the plug and expect it to heal itself.  It's going to be an intentional process. And that's why I'm so excited about this concept of regenerative by design.  It's like, how do we start laying the foundation down that's like a design process, it's a thinking process, it's a systems process where we create infrastructure that will then cultivate the concept of regeneration moving forward.  So then it becomes self perpetuating.  I'd love you to just kind of wrap on that a little bit.  
**[0:28:02-0:28:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:28:02):**  You know, as we move forward.  Joni, you know what finally first has to happen to everybody, they have to have a complete mind shift, a whole paradigm shift.  And that's what happened to me.  And sometimes you have to go through these disruptions like you use that word.  Sometimes we need disruptions.  
**[0:28:21-0:28:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:28:21):**  I love, I like these holy disruptions.  Sometimes you have to hit your inner being and realize through failure that you've got to have that first.  You've got to have a different mind shift.  You've got to have that wake up call.  And I got it.  
**[0:28:37-0:28:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:28:37):**  And regenerative, that's why when my first part of my definition of regenerative agriculture is like this, regenerative agriculture is a journey for life.  It's a shift of the mind and heart and how to emulate the intelligent design.  You've got to change. It's a complete shift.  It's a shift in the way you think. And I had to go through that.  That's number one.  
**[0:29:00-0:29:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:29:00):**  Yeah, heart and mind.  And what makes regenerative farmers different from the others?  Believe it or not, a lot of them came to this conclusion.  They were looking for hope.  The system was failing.  
**[0:29:14-0:29:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:29:14):**  It wasn't working.  Like if you listen to Gabe four times, he almost lost the farm.  Many conditions.  Me, I was getting depressed.  I said we weren't fixing anything.  
**[0:29:24-0:29:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:29:24):**  Sometimes you have to experience the valley before you can get to the mountaintop.  So that's where the spiritual, that's where you come with the spiritual connection.  That's why I told Joni I don't separate the spiritual plane from the physical plane.  And I think what our schools have done is, oh, you can't, you can't interconnect that.  And the Native Americans understood.  
**[0:29:44-0:29:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:29:44):**  And that's why quantum physics is so cool.  Because quantum physics is saying, oh, no, this metaphysical plane is real.  It's real.  And that's why learning how to communicate with people and how to talk to them and how to reach them.  You notice, Joni, one more thing I'll say is when I approach a group, I always want to know them.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:30:10):**  And I address this number one thing.  Why should I listen to you?  Why should they listen to me?  And if you don't address that in that whole talk, you're not going to connect.  And another thing is I connect to them as a person, connect with them emotionally, physically, and spiritually.  
**[0:30:30-0:30:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:30:30):**  All the connection happens very quickly and people don't aware of it.  So I do all that at one time.  And so that's why I'm able to walk people down this direction and show them the power of life.  So first, I connect with them.  Why should they listen to me?  
**[0:30:44-0:30:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:30:44):**  And then I leave them with the end goal.  It's not about cover crops.  It's not about tools.  It's about mimicking the natural system, emulating and design.  And then that's a deprogramming process, really.  
**[0:30:57-0:30:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:30:57):**  Yeah, it really is.  And I mean, I have to thank you, Ray, because like last year I was speaking to a group of people about, you know, what is regenerative?  Like very entry level 101.  And I know I reached out to you a number of times and I saw you speak in the middle of this whole process.  And I'm like, how do we break it down to a way where people can approach it and feel like it's tangible and not too overwhelming?  
**[0:31:21-0:31:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:31:21):**  And with that whole concept of emulating nature being really at the center of it and biology being at the center of it.  And that's when I came up with those three B's of regenerative and they probably have a long ways to go as far as refinement and whatever.  But it's that concept of biomimicry, biologicals and biodiversity are the three levers that contribute to a fully functioning regenerative system.  And the tools actually are used in all three quadrants.  The practices are all three quadrants.  
**[0:31:50-0:32:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:31:50):**  But really at the end of the day, it's like that team, those three B's working together that make us work with nature to optimize nature and optimize natural systems to help achieve our goals rather than taking the bio part out.  Where we remove biology and then we replace it with like you said chemistry and physics and force to force what we need out of nature.  It's two very different operating systems.  And it was fundamental listening to your talk last fall at the Spokane Conservation District event because it just totally blew me away.  Yeah, it totally blew me away. It was a good one.  
**[0:32:31-0:32:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:32:31):**  And you know what, Joni, what I don't like also too that I think we're clouding the issue is with carbon.  The carbon tunnel vision can be really dangerous.  I mean carbon is important because it's biology. I mean carbon is biology.  But now that we're putting money on it and we're making it like I think like there can be value to monetization of certain practices that help farmers.  But if we have carbon tunnel vision, we're missing the point.  
**[0:32:59-0:33:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:32:59):**  I think you said the key word biodiversity.  I think if we I think that's why I love green payment or biodiversity payment.  Here's the thing. If we get biology right, the carbon will get sequestered.  It'll be taken care of. But the moment we focus on carbon and here's my problem as a soil scientist.  I'd say, OK, most people don't realize carbon is in three phases.  
**[0:33:22-0:33:30](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:33:22):**  Solid, yeah, we're getting a leaking root liquid and then microbes and plants respiring CO2 gases.  And it's in the gas and you're in the gas.  And so we're going to pay farmers for something that changes like that.  Right. No, I think it leads down a path of confusion and it doesn't address the fact that we have a disruptive water cycle and we have a disruptive biodiversity system.  So if we address green payments and having plants, then we fix the water cycle, we fix the insects, we fix covering the soil.  
**[0:33:58-0:34:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:33:58):**  We've addressed all those. But the moment you focus on CO2, that's a breeze confusion.  Well, the other thing, too, is that nowhere in the carbon narrative is there an impact on nutrients, integrity of the end products of the food.  So, you know, look at your study with Dr. David Montgomery, where you're looking at the omega three fatty acid levels in beef that comes from regenerative grass fed systems.  It actually looks like a different ingredient under nutrient evaluation.  And in nowhere would carbon dynamics explain that.  
**[0:34:33-0:34:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:34:33):**  No. And a lot of times, too, Joni, to be brutally honest, a lot of farmers don't understand carbon.  What do you mean? And Burleigh, the rest of us.  OK, so it's a solid, it's a gas, it's a liquid, it's it's an energy flow.  It goes through the whole system. That's awesome. But it's like an energy currency.  Exactly. Exactly. It's like what do we just focus on? Something that people can see and it's easy to measure and you can you can fly over an airplane, go boom.  
**[0:35:05-0:35:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:35:05):**  Oh, it's green. Let's make let's just make it green again. Let's just. Yeah.  What there's my term, I said, just cover it. Just yeah. Yeah.  It's that's keeping things green. It is that simple.  And it pains me every time I drive through area that just miles and miles and miles of bare open land, you know, with a good wind blowing through.  And you just see you just watch the topsoil blowing away and and then you think, well, it's summertime.  
**[0:35:37-0:35:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:35:37):**  Why isn't this green? Like, why isn't there something on the dirt?  And that action alone. I mean, that's. Yeah. And the winter, too, like classic conservation agriculture.  But, you know, it's these are very, very basic principles. But I've always thought, you know, I lived in Alaska for a long time and it's the only place really on Earth, other than the desert that I've seen primary succession naturally happen.  You have these huge glacial glacial areas and you're right there. Primary succession, you know, major deserts.  It's like a primary succession, but not going the right direction. And and I'm like, OK, but then you go where it's recently been plowed and then sprayed.  
**[0:36:15-0:36:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:36:15):**  It's like a primary succession event again and again and again every year. And nature is not designed to have annual primary succession events like it's just not like it's those are very disruptive.  And, you know, kind of terrifying prophecies really from a biological standpoint. You know, you're like rebuilding all the structures from the ground up.  So, you know, I just feel like there's so much that we can learn from nature and that to change the paradigm of all these fantastic thousands of scientists we have around the planet.  If we can just get that lens of working with nature. Imagine what we could harness, you know, with the farmers, scientists, people who are innovators and creative about these systems.  Imagine the power we could harness to really change the trajectory of our planet if we just applied the right lens.  
**[0:37:04-0:37:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:37:04):**  Wow. And I love that, Joni. In fact, it's like eating bad food. I tell people, look, your body can handle an acute stress.  Sometimes you just have to eat and that's all there's. But it can't handle chronic and it can't handle those chronic disruptions you're talking about.  And so we have that healing process. And so I think that I have never had so much excitement in my life now because now I have hope.  I think that we're getting the biology, the ecologies coming to the forefront. And I think people are saying it's in magazines. It's spreading everywhere.  If you would have done this 15 years ago, you would have typed the word soil health or biology, soil biology. It's like you would have gotten a scant number.  
**[0:37:52-0:38:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:37:52):**  Now there's billions of hits on the web. Thousands of YouTube channels, videos on biology. It's exciting.  Yeah. It's what we need. It's an awakening.  I love it. And only it's an awakening, but I love it. Like one of my favorite spiritual persons is a broken man and Dr. Timothy Keller.  We're going to create a holy disruption. We are going to create a movement that brings not only healing.  And I coined the phrase from Dr. Keller as a pastor in New York. He says that there's something beautiful going on now.  
**[0:38:42-0:38:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:38:42):**  And what it is is man healing to the ecology. Man is a relationship to man to man and the relationship of God to man.  These three beautiful things are happening now, Joni. Now. And I believe that. And that's what's been driving me is that I believe that those three things are being healed now.  Man to the ecology, man to man and man to God.  Yeah. It's this massive cultural shift that is happening right now. And I feel like once you kind of step out of this constant chatter that's negative and kind of reinforcing negativity,  you actually start to see that there is this awakening of these connections being made. And as much as everybody loves to gripe about the great resignation,  
**[0:39:30-0:39:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:39:30):**  people don't want to work anymore and they're just lazy. I'm like, well, actually, wait a minute. Wonder if you really stand back and go, they just don't believe.  They don't believe in it. It's not that they don't want to work. It's they don't want to work without purpose.  And purpose actually means more than money to them. That's a fundamental shift in philosophy that is deeply indicative of a shift in in like the entire system of the value system of the world.  And I don't think that's a bad thing. No, I think it's wonderful, Joni. Look, I'm a I'm a baby boomer. I'm a tail end of the baby boomer.  My daughter, I got two thirty threes and a thirty. And I had to move my little millennial daughter. And she's one day she joined the military.  
**[0:40:15-0:40:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:40:15):**  She was lieutenant. Got a health problem. She quit. And then she got a really good job with Boeing in L.A.  And I just paid money to move her over there. And I'm telling you, one day she calls me, says, Dad, I can't do this anymore.  I said, what, baby? Because I don't want to be I want a job with purpose. Exactly what you said, Joni.  I want to be able to serve. It's not about the money. I want to be I want to have something that's tangible, that has purpose.  And now she's starting to be a nurse and now she could be a nurse. She's going to eventually be a physician assistant.  
**[0:40:49-0:40:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:40:49):**  But it ties in beautifully what you're saying, Joni. People want a job with purpose. This generation, you know, they're fed up.  They're saying, hey, this is baloney. You mean you work. Look, our generation. And I'm just speaking for myself.  It's materialism. More and more accumulate. Work, work, work, work, work, work. And for what?  And then, yeah, but I see my daughter saying, no, Dad, I want to make a difference. And that's why millennials read labels.  70 percent of them read labels. They're saying, I don't know. I don't want this stuff. I'm excited.  
**[0:41:27-0:41:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:41:27):**  Yeah, I think it's a good shift. And I mean, with everything, there's like a good and a bad. I mean, there's always that tension point anytime there's change.  But, you know, if we can shift as a culture, you know, not only in our regions and our nations, but globally where we shift this perspective to purpose and having the things we need to survive rather than this constant dog chasing the tail because they want more and more and more.  But there's really no reason why you're chasing the tail. That creates a lot of very unhappy, unfulfilled people, even if they have everything in the world that you think you ever wanted.  Yeah, you're right, Joni. That's why I'm working on a project called, recently I asked for funding and we got funding from a donor for his kindness.  But one of the projects I'm working is being able to spread regenerative agriculture to the churches. And we just completed a little 12 minute trailer and it's already won several awards.  
**[0:42:26-0:42:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:42:26):**  And once it's done, we'll be able to share it, Joni. But what we want is to be shown in churches. How can we, how can professing Christians or people of other faiths, let's get engaged in healing the planet now?  Yes, thank you. That's amazing.  And the first one we've done is called Dominion and it's based on the scripture in Genesis where God says, I'm going to give you dominion over the earth. But people have taken that as like, hey, I'm the boss.  I can do whatever and I can trash it. I can force it. I'm the boss. I'm special. I'm made in God's image. And the reality is that scripture has been misunderstood.  It actually tells you, come and be a servant and love the earth. Be like Christ's image, how he served. Not come and force it and control it and manipulate it and destroy it.  
**[0:43:22-0:43:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:43:22):**  That's not what that narrative was talking about. So we did, we created a 12 minute trailer for that.  And another one we're going to create that we're going to call is called maybe the end times, another doctrine that Christians, well, they said, well, God's coming back. He's going to make a new earth.  We can just go and they're not saying this, but this is what's happening. We can ignore our neighbor, we can ignore our society, we can ignore the planet. It's going to be big new.  And that's not scriptural. And so we're trying to create a new narrative for that because believe it or not, Christianity is going to grow in South America and Africa up to 3 billion by 2050.  And we want to teach people the correct aspect of looking at these so that, especially as thought processes, so that we don't perpetuate a destruction of the planet because of our own, I love the way you said it Joni, lenses are filters.  
**[0:44:23-0:44:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:44:23):**  Yeah. So that's the project I'm working on right now. That is fantastic because I've often thought like how can we leverage faith based groups and communities to get behind this movement because I mean if anyone's ever been to a church potluck, whether it's, it doesn't matter what faith is, like there's always food because food is, is like how we commune with nature.  It's an essential touch point between our human system and our natural system, water and food and air. That's how we commune with nature. And, and it's also the foundation of community is through, you know, sharing the food and how can we leverage faith based communities to spread this word to people who wouldn't normally be involved in food and agriculture like that's an incredible, incredible outreach program and I let me know what I can do to help because that is fantastic.  I will join it because I get so excited about this because I think this is the future. And so if we just talk to farmers, this is not enough. We need to talk to our schools, our high schools, our churches. We need a big push. And it's now.  And it's not just about healing the planet, but healing our communities, healing our, and that's why I love, there's a term by Dr. Bruggeman, he's called a prophetic, we're trying to create a prophetic meaning a visionary, something that is coming to play, something that is a positive narrative, not a doomsday prophecy, but a prophecy of hope and love.  And then we can heal this. And that's what we're doing in our communities. I'm excited about it.  
**[0:46:09-0:46:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:46:09):**  Because this message brings people together across vast divides, like from political to religious and everything in between. The message of what the hope of regenerative, you know, I guess philosophy for lack of a better term, it's something that's deeply, deeply resonating with people of all walks of life. In fact, I was at an event last night and talking to a Republican public office holder, who's very, very special.  conservative, and we had the most amazing talk about regenerative agriculture, and why Idaho needs to really get behind it. And he was just so enthusiastic. And I love those conversations that like it just like and then yesterday, I had somebody who was on a Democratic committee, same kind of conversation, same kind of deal. And I'm like, finally, at last, we have something that everybody can agree on that needs to happen. Like, there is magic there.  Because that is just fantastic. So I, you know, Ray, I am always inspired by every time I hear you speak, whether it's on a movie or at a lecture or just on the phone, like it's just always so amazing. And I feel like conversations like this help preserve that hope and that that thinking and that education that we can share with people. So that someday we can, you know, this movement can really radically transform the world for the for the good and for the good.  And for the better.  Oh, I'm excited. Joni, you know, you know how much I appreciate you having me come and speak with you. I'm humbled. And I told my wife, look, I love being on the ranch. And I never talked about to the group. I'm also a rancher. I raise sheep. I have a small ranch in Missouri. And if it was to my selfish self, Joni, I'll be honest, I could just stay home, watch a movie.  
**[0:48:06-0:48:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:48:06):**  I could just stay home, watch Sheep Grage and just spend time with my wife. But the reality is, I think you and the rest of us feel, no, our planet needs us. Our communities need us. And I was one time-  The calling.  It is my calling. And it's to me not to fulfill my calling before God, I would just be horribly feel terrible. I just couldn't do it. And that's why I spend the hours and the miles flying. And because once I get there and I leave my house and go there and then I meet these group of people that are so impassioned and that the knowledge, the framework that the information was displayed to them and they get it. It's exciting. It just gives me hope.  It is. Yeah. And it makes you numb to this doom and gloom feeling out there where the media is trying to convince us that the world's coming to an end. And then you're like, well, wait a minute. I just had the most fantastic talk with my friend Ray and we can do this. Like, I'm not going to buy into that narrative. Like, there's millions of people around the world that want purpose and wanted invest to where our grandchildren and great grandchildren and we'll have an awesome world of purpose.  And we have a world to live in with resources and harmony and a planet that's habitable. So I just every time I talk to you and all these folks in Regenerative, it's a truly humbling movement to be a part of. So thanks so much for your dedication, Ray. You're awesome. And you, Joni. And all of you that let's be part of it. And so how and people are gonna say, well, what can we do? Right, Joni? What can the average person do? Yeah. So what can they do?  
**[0:49:47-0:50:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:49:47):**  Yeah. And so I tell people, first thing is, is start educating yourself. Start being informed. Where you buy your food, it does matter. Go look for a regenerative farmer. It does matter where you buy your food. And plant a garden. Get your kids to touch the soil. Let them be engaged. You be engaged.  You can plant a box. Yes. Even if it's a little pot, you got skin in the game. It doesn't matter. It's a small garden. If you farm 50 acres, you found one, you form a little pot. I don't care. Touch the soil. Be involved. Be involved with the natural system and eat accordingly. Start taking care of your most precious thing is your body.  And Joni deal with this all the time. Look, Joni, if I'm not in good health, I can't continue doing this mission. And so I've started to become, all of us are starting to become more focused about that. Take care of your body because you only get one of them.  Yeah. And so, yeah, it's so true. And come to an investment. An investment. Come to school and people say, well, I have a friend that's losing weight now. And he's first time he called me says, right, I'm down to 197 for the first time in my life. And he's so excited. I said, now Steve, now you're gonna buy quality. And I know you don't want to spend the money. Because he's like, I don't, you know, I said, No, you eat less, but better quality food.  And quality over quantity. Right. And people have said, well, that's nice, Ray, but regenerative agriculture is for rich people and not for the people that are poor. I said, Oh, no, no, no, no, no, I said, all disagree. I disagree. I said, grow a garden. You'll have a cell phone. You'll pay for satellite TV, but you can't go buy a couple of seeds and plant it on the side of your house. Come on. You can. We can do all kinds of things.  
**[0:51:47-0:51:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:51:47):**  So it's just kind of an excuse.  And community gardens. I mean, there's like fantastic community gardens in urban areas where people don't have access to land and, and that's that wake up that's happening. I see it everywhere, like popping up around, you know, the country where people want that tangible connection. They want to feel like they're involved in in bringing forth life, you know, watching a seed sprout. That's a that's a fundamental thing, even for kids to watch where they're like, wow, that's where food comes from. I put that seed in the ground.  And it's sprouted. So, you know, we're sprouting a movement and it's, and it's really going to take shape. And it is an exciting thing to be a part of. So I agree as far as action items, and we hear that a lot on this show, get involved with where your food came from, learn how to cook, learn how to grow it, talk to your farmers. It's all foundational. And actually, what I've noticed is that people who live that way, they don't always spend more on their food. I mean, I don't spend very much time on their food.  I don't spend very much on my food at all. We're on a very limited budget. But we are really judicious and what we prioritize our purchasing to be. And I think it just contributes to better mindset, better health, physical and mental health both. And I've noticed that, you know, there is that connection that you can't, you can't separate the mental health and the physical health from the food. And it just we could have a whole session just on that, right. But I know it's we're at the top of the hour. So for our listeners who want to take this a level deeper, where do they  find you? How do they learn more about you? Where would you send them? Like in the World Wide Web?  
**[0:53:21-0:53:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:53:21):**  Here's what we're gonna do. My website is going to come up. It's gonna be called Ray the Soil Guy, LLC. It'll be up by January, and we're working on that. If people want to go, I'm also co founder of Soil Health Academy. If people want to go to a school, Soil Health Academy, go take a three day school. Soil Health Academy is a great place to go.  It is. Yeah, it's a great school, three days, and you get to be with some of the best experts in the world about understanding regenerative agriculture. So my website will be up. Also, too, I will be hosting people on my farm, like if they want to spend a whole day with me. They can kind of reserve a day.  And they can come to my sheep farm, but I also can teach them levels of soil ecology and those kind of things. So we're going to have that up by January. So that would be good. Another thing, another thing to Joanie, I want to put a plug in for is continue to watch, go watch that documentary Kiss the Ground.  And share it with people and share that. And there's another one I really was impressed with. It's called Fantastic Fungi. Fantastic Fungi. I love that. That was a very good one. And then the other documentary that I think is a really good one, The Big Little Farm. I think you've seen that one too, Joanie.  Yeah. And what I love about this, people can understand the struggle of farmers and ranchers. And I kind of want to leave people with this thought about, I think sometimes we think that farming and ranching is one of the least or the most sophisticated career on the planet.  
**[0:55:08-0:55:23](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:55:08):**  But I will tell you, I get kind of frustrated when I hear farmers say, I'm just a farmer. I'm just a rancher. I hate to hear that. I said, just out of there. Oh, I hate that. I said, do you know you have the most difficult job on the planet?  You're dealing with an elegant ecosystem that changes every minute, every moment. And your skill set, you have to be an engineer, you have to be a machinist, you have to be a welder, you have to be a tire changer, you have to be a CPA. You have to be a businessman.  I said, really? And you're telling me, oh, by the way, you got to be an agronomist and a nutrient specialist? Oh, by the way, a livestock specialist? Oh, by the way, on your spare time, be a vet. And I said, yeah, and you're telling me it is I'm just a farmer? Really?  Yeah. Yeah. I love that. Call him out. Yeah. I said, no, you got the most difficult profession. Flying to the moon is easy. Try feeding the world. On that note, I have to say that is the best closing sentence we have ever closed on.  Flying to the moon versus feeding the world. And yeah, it's, hey, Elon, one of these days, he's going to call me and be like, what can we do to help the regenerative movement because technology is not going to fix this. Biology is.  
**[0:56:29-0:56:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:56:29):**  So, Elon, if you're out there listening, give me a call. And on that note, we will let our audience know in the show notes where to find you and learn more. Ray, this has been fantastic. And for those of you who are listening, please take a moment to rate this podcast, share with your friends, share on social, so that way we can carry this message and this awesome story about what Ray's doing in regenerative systems with others.  So we can't do it without support from our listeners. So on that note, thank you so much for listening today. And I hope you're walking away inspired and feeling hopeful. Bye now.  Thank you, Joni.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast. If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary, and guest information.  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry. We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  
**[0:57:39-0:57:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/0b808b88#t=0:57:39):**  Learn more about our work at snacktivistfoods.com.  