---
title: Talking About Growing Teff In Idaho With Royd Carlson Of Teffco
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-08-11)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Royd Carlson  

**[0:00:00-0:00:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinwall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  
**[0:00:44-0:00:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:00:44):**  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  Okay, hello and welcome to the Regenerative by Design podcast series.  And today I'm sitting here with the Carlson family at their awesome teff facility in Boise, Idaho.  And I have Royd here. Royd is one of the brothers.  And he's going to tell us a little bit about this awesome operation.  
**[0:01:17-0:01:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:01:17):**  And you'll just have to ignore a little bit of the echo because we're in a warehouse for real, which is really fitting, but doesn't make for the best acoustics.  So welcome.  Thank you.  Yeah, so I appreciate you taking the time out of the day. I know you're busy.  Today, you know, I'd like you to tell our listeners a little bit about your journey as a person, but also your family's journey.  
**[0:01:40-0:01:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:01:40):**  Like how in the world did you guys start growing teff in Idaho?  Yeah, so originally my dad, he ended up going to Ethiopia to work on public health with UCSF.  And while he was there, he spent a couple of years there and became acquainted with Ethiopian food and agriculture and really was quite impressed with the system that they developed there.  And then when he came back to the US, it was sort of around the same time that a lot of Ethiopian refugees also moved to the US for the first time.  And he knew the importance of teff in their diet. In Ethiopian culture, they use it almost exclusively to make a fermented flatbread.  
**[0:02:32-0:02:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:02:32):**  And he thought that bread's called Adira.  And my dad knew that, you know, that was extremely important to them. And he was living in Idaho and knew a few farmers around and so just decided to get them to try their hands at growing it.  And then called some Ethiopian people out of the Washington DC phone book where most of the refugees originally went. And then it just kind of went from there.  So cool. So speaking of Adira, I showed up on the best day here at TEFCO headquarters because you guys are having a birthday party and there was fresh made Adira bread and some amazing Ethiopian food.  And so that's a really wonderful way to start out something like this.  
**[0:03:23-0:03:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:03:23):**  If you've not tried that, definitely reach out to see if there is a local Ethiopian restaurant in your community because it's really unique and delicious and super healthy.  So, you know, as far as you and your brothers now, because when I first met you guys, it was your parents.  And at least I didn't meet you at that time. This was a few years back. Like who's running the operation now? Are you and your brother?  Yeah. Yes. Mainly my brother and I. And then our parents sort of, you know, add their two cents here and there.  Yeah. They're trying to enjoy a little bit of free time. I'm sure they've been entrepreneurs for that many decades. I'm sure that they're definitely deserving a nice break.  
**[0:04:07-0:04:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:04:07):**  It's not an easy road. So, you know, that's one of the reasons I wanted to talk to you guys is because you think about what it takes to start growing a specialty crop like Tef.  It's up against a lot of challenges when it comes to path to market just because of, you know, harvesting it is a special equipment, all the processing steps, cleaning any sort of, you know, and then you guys do mill it as well, which a lot of Tef is, you know, it's a tiny seed if anybody has ever seen it.  It's literally poppy seed size. And so I think for a lot of people who are being introduced to Tef, they don't really know where to start. And then, you know, do you eat it milked? Do you eat it whole? Like, what could you tell us about, you know, Tef when it comes to processing?  Yeah. So, I mean, going from the farm to the warehouse, a lot of the equipment for other grains is sort of almost works, but not quite.  Tef is different enough that the equipment that's been engineered for particular grains is just not quite going to work the same way. Tef is pretty small. It's about as big as a poppy seed and it's pretty abrasive.  
**[0:05:24-0:05:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:05:24):**  So that can cause a lot of wear on equipment that other grains just won't, you know, they won't cause that kind of wear. A lot of the farm equipment is pretty much the same as the equipment that you would use for other grains.  But the farmers just need to be aware of the differences with Tef and keep an eye on how things are working and maybe adjust their practices a little bit.  How do you find these farmers?  So, it's a little bit tricky. A lot of farmers are kind of conservative with trying new things for good reason. And, you know, they're not always easy to find. It's not like they've got websites where you just look them up.  So, there's a lot of word of mouth. Often we try to find one grower in a region that can have some success with Tef and over time the other farmers sort of are able to see how things work.  
**[0:06:30-0:06:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:06:30):**  And then often it takes a few years to sort of get the first guy up to speed and get other people seeing that it does in fact work. And then we kind of can go from there.  Where does Tef like to grow? I know it is very specialized as far as the environment that it likes to grow in, especially being from dry desert mountains in Africa as a native terrain.  What are you finding Tef is thriving in here in North America, especially with things getting drier and warmer?  Yeah, so in Ethiopia, Ethiopia is fairly high altitude. I think probably the average might be around 8,000 feet of the place where people are growing Tef.  And it's near to the equator. So, there's a lot of bright sunlight. Here in the US, the conditions are not exactly the same, but some of the high desert like here in Idaho or around the West works pretty well.  
**[0:07:34-0:07:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:07:34):**  In Ethiopia, most of all of the Tef is rain fed. And here in the US, we're mostly using irrigated lands. So that gives us a little more control and the ability to get better yields than they might in Africa.  Like if they don't get any early spring rain. I know some farmers down in California that are growing Tef and they have a teeny bit of irrigation in the spring and it's just enough to get it going.  Yeah, I think that's some of the most important water is at the beginning. And then Tef is drought tolerant in the sense that having a shortage of water is not going to ruin the crop. The best yields are when you give it the right amount of water, which is still less than other crops.  But the good thing about Tef is if it is drier or you get your water cut off, then you can still come out with something.  You'll have something. Yeah, that's what we've been hearing from a number of farmers, especially down south where they're like, I need a guarantee that if we don't get another drop of rain and they're reducing our access to irrigation or their dryland, that we'll be able to harvest something.  
**[0:08:51-0:09:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:08:51):**  Even if it's not fantastic yields, they feel the same way about millets as well, where even with the commodity prices being what they are for wheat and corn, I'm getting more and more phone calls from farmers that are like, we want to grow Proso because we're not convinced that we'll be able to have a corn or wheat crop with these conditions.  So, Tef is something that comes up in those conversations, too. And to me, that adds a lot of value to the concept of building popularity around these crops.  I mean, not only are they really nutritious, but they do play a unique role in diversifying the agricultural landscapes and trying to find some sort of food staple that does thrive under hot, dry conditions.  It's an interesting challenge. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it kind of provides some additional insurance to growers where, you know, if the conditions, the climatic conditions change a little bit, they can still count on part of their crops working well.  Yeah, exactly. Exactly. So, you know, as far as the nutritional components of Tef, it is a uniquely nutritious grain. Could you speak a little bit about the nutrition?  
**[0:10:04-0:10:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:10:04):**  Yeah. So, one of the things that pops out to people who are interested in nutrition is the protein content in Tef is quite high. It's about 10% protein.  Another thing that people are starting to realize is more and more important is the fiber content. So, Tef is very high in fiber and we're starting to realize that is important with sort of the microbiome and the gut intestines or the intestinal health.  Yeah, absolutely.  The Tef is also pretty high in calcium and iron. And then one feature that isn't important to everybody, but some people it's very important is the fact that Tef is gluten free.  Yeah. It's naturally a gluten free grain and there's a whole suite of interesting grains that are not related to wheat that have some special, you know, nutritional qualities and it's great for those people who are avoiding gluten or on, you know, celiac or on a wheat free diet.  
**[0:11:13-0:11:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:11:13):**  But, you know, it's interesting how many people can be reluctant to try something like Tef, you know, because they're like, well, I can eat wheat, but there's a really strong argument to add Tef to your wheat just for a different nutritional profile just to help drive that diversity in the agricultural landscape.  And give farmers something to grow when it's hot and dry and maybe your wheat crops not going to really do so well.  So, you know, with this infrastructure here, because this is a big, bigger, beautiful building, much larger than your previous one.  Can you tell us a little bit how you guys have mechanized your milling and your processing to make it more efficient?  Has that helped you guys reach bigger consumer groups to sell into because you're just at scale?  
**[0:12:02-0:12:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:12:02):**  Yeah. So, I mean, as we grow more acres of Tef there is literally just more pounds of grain to handle.  And so, you know, what you started out doing by hand becomes a little bit too much work over time.  So, most of our sort of automation mechanization has just been labor saving to try to move more stuff around more easily.  We've also did, my brother is an engineer and we've done a lot of work on the milling system to figure out exactly what best works to mill Tef.  We've been through just about every type of milling system.  
**[0:12:50-0:12:51](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:12:50):**  I think you have.  And we feel like we've found a few things that work pretty well at this stage.  Nice.  But we're always kind of improving that.  Yeah. It's really handy to have an engineer in the family, I've decided.  
**[0:13:01-0:13:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:13:01):**  It's one of those things.  Every family needs one because there's always great ways to improve processes.  And especially when you're milling something that's as coarse as Tef.  Like you said, it's almost like it wears things down.  Right. So, that's an interesting thing to be up against.  
**[0:13:18-0:13:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:13:18):**  What do you guys mostly sell?  Like what's your number one channel for Tef flower?  And I know that there are different types of Tef.  You sell both ivory and dark Tef.  Yeah. So, the majority of our business is with people from the Ethiopian and Eritrean communities here in the US.  
**[0:13:37-0:13:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:13:37):**  But that is kind of the vast majority.  But it's gaining popularity among other people, particularly people who are concerned about gluten-free diets.  Or just eating sort of more healthy, healthy whole grain or ancient grains.  Very cool. Very cool.  Are you seeing more people get into specialty milling?  
**[0:14:02-0:14:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:14:02):**  Are you getting calls from people who are wanting to set up?  We haven't seen a lot of that.  We do have a few old mills that we have used previously.  And we occasionally get people that are interested in buying those from us.  I guess some of those mills are...  
**[0:14:26-0:14:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:14:26):**  There's kind of a balance between thinking, you know, starting doing a small scale milling.  And these mills sometimes may be a little bit too much for some people to handle.  Right. Right. They're a little too big scale for the really boutique micro scale.  You really need some engineering expertise or, you know, expertise in milling to properly use them.  Yeah, it is such a specialty.  
**[0:14:53-0:15:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:14:53):**  And to be honest, I completely underestimated the complexity and the nuances of milling until I got into this industry.  I mean, we had a countertop like mill, you know, just like from the 70s.  Yeah. But obviously that's not going to work for a business setting.  It was very much slow and cool.  It made great stuff. But I've been really awed at, you know, the industry as a whole and how fragmented it is.  
**[0:15:23-0:15:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:15:23):**  I feel like there's still such a huge focus on the ultra large scale commodities, which are totally ultra efficient.  And that's great and all because that helps control cost.  But we do need, I think, as a nation to take a hard look at our mid-level infrastructure.  Yeah. Well, certainly. I mean, the mills that we have are not as gigantic as some of the big milling companies use.  They're sort of the intermediate.  
**[0:15:51-0:15:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:15:51):**  And we like to talk to people who are interested in smaller scale milling to see how we can help them make things work.  Yeah, that's awesome.  Well, it's interesting, you know, just looking forward at the things that we're up against as a world.  I'm passionate about this concept of like regenerative design thinking where it's like, how do we want to take something that could be problematic in the future and make it more efficient by really thinking through it today?  You know, like let's apply this design thinking process and think about how we can set ourselves up for resiliency and for success in the future.  
**[0:16:27-0:16:36](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:16:27):**  And to me personally, obviously, you know, having more access to high quality foods like taff is a biggie.  But then also things like having access to small scale milling.  You know, you look at the disruption of COVID, you look at the disruption with the war in Ukraine.  Like there's a lot of strength in investing in these smaller projects.  And I'm just wondering what that kind of process means to you as somebody who's working in this industry.  
**[0:16:58-0:17:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:16:58):**  Yeah, I mean, I guess one of the ways that we think about it is we're just trying to provide farmers with another arrow in their quiver.  And, you know, that means different things to different people.  You know, we've got farmers in many different regions and they grow different crops and how taff fits in with them is different for each one, even within certain, even within the same region.  But, yeah, that just gives the whole system a little bit more stability and flexibility when they have those options.  Do you guys ever step back and trip out on that and go, wow, we're a really important cog in the wheel of that greater picture?  
**[0:17:42-0:17:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:17:42):**  I mean, I wouldn't say that we trip out on it, but we try to be helpful.  It's an interesting concept because, you know, to our listeners who are out there and don't know this side of the food system,  we're going to do a whole series on value added processing and how we can make manufacturing better, more sustainable,  but still have the efficiencies that we need to keep a food system running at a good clip, which is also really important.  So, you know, definitely stay tuned.  
**[0:18:16-0:18:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:18:16):**  And I'm appreciative that you're kicking off the second segment with me.  And we work with these guys. We source all of our milled taff from them.  So it's a fun part of our picture as snacktivists as well as we grow because we're really committed to supporting these family owned and operated mills  and the work they're doing in our communities. So as far as action items, I'm sure there's some people who are curious out there.  I mean, what can they do to get more involved with this kind of stuff? I mean, obviously eating more taff is a helpful thing, but what kind of things could people do?  
**[0:18:49-0:18:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:18:49):**  I mean, one of the things that the sort of average person could do is just if you're interested in trying new things, just give it a try.  And if you're interested in developing recipes, that helps a lot. One of the issues with taff is most people have not even heard of it necessarily and don't know how to use it.  And so just figuring out ways to use it is really important. And we don't really have the answers, but the creativity of people who are out there.  Yeah. Yeah. You do have to think outside of the box. And I have to think about when I first started playing around with taff flour.  I found it at a bulk bin in a health food store and I'm like, oh, I'll make something. Well, you can imagine how that turned out.  
**[0:19:36-0:19:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:19:36):**  And so I was like, OK, well, I like the flavor. It had some really cool benefits to it that I liked, but just overdone.  So then the next time I made pancakes and these weren't gluten free pancakes, they were just general pancakes from my family.  I added a couple tablespoons of it was dark taff and my kids loved it like they were babies at the time.  But it actually added a really awesome flavor and texture and the way that it played with the wheat flour.  And that's what led us to developing our taff waffle mix.  
**[0:20:09-0:20:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:20:09):**  You know, then when my son had to cut out all the wheat in his diet, like, well, pancake mix is kind of ubiquitous in our household, like Saturday and Sunday.  Or when I'm coaxing my kids to go to school and they don't feel like it. And so that's, you know, branded.  We were able to figure out how to increase our percentage more than just a couple spoonfuls, which is exciting because I feel like it's introducing people to new flavors like that and expanding their palate is part of our passion and part of what we do at Snacktivist.  And you guys are definitely doing that, too. And your website's fabulous. You guys have a lot of cool recipes. So everyone out there, check it out.  What is your guys's web address? So it's TEFFCO.com. That's TEFFCO.com. Nice. Nice.  
**[0:20:54-0:21:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:20:54):**  And on the website, we have a lot of recipes that are probably interesting for people. Also, if you're interested in learning how to make injera, the Ethiopian flatbread, then we have a that's kind of a more difficult and more extensive process.  But we've got a tutorial to teach people how to do that as well.  But, you know, people are really into naturally leavened things now. So I feel like a lot of those barriers went down over COVID when people made friends with sourdough culture. So this is kind of stepping it up a notch. But I'd urge people who are at home and do have that culinary flair.  It's certainly a fun thing. And the photography that you guys have in that series is beautiful. Like it makes you literally want to make it. It's just so picturesque and pretty.  So just to close things up, you know, when you look at everything going on today and you guys are awfully busy running businesses, what gives you hope for the future? What are the things that are making you feel hopeful today?  
**[0:21:51-0:22:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:21:51):**  I mean, I'm just I'm always happy to see how interested people are in TEF and other grains as well. I think, you know, the the food system has kind of gone through a period of being not really that interesting in some ways. And we're that is probably changing slowly. So that's exciting.  Yeah, it is really exciting. That gives me hope too. Well, great. Well, we'll make sure to post the links to your guys's information and your work. So our listeners can go to the show notes and check it out. But thanks for joining me today.  Thanks for having me.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast. If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry. We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  
**[0:23:02-0:23:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/210d4f62#t=0:23:02):**  Learn more about our work at snacktivistfoods.com  