---
title: Zacca Hummus Zenner Farms Talks About Regenerative Agriculture
description: Transcripts for podcasts from the regenerative agriculture space. Search and find episodes and timestamps.
---

### Regenerative by Design  (2022-10-20)  
### Author(s): Joni Kindwall-Moore & Janine Zacca & Russ Zenner  

**[0:00:00-0:00:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:00:00):**  Hello everyone. You are listening to the Regenerative by Design podcast, where we will be getting to the root of health, climate, economics, and food.  I am your host, Joni Kinlall-Moore. I'm an RN, an ethnobotanist, and the founder of Snacktivist Foods.  Join me on this journey as we explore the ideas, stories, and personalities behind the regenerative food system movement.  
**[0:00:26-0:00:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:00:26):**  Food is the connection between people and planet. In a world where pandemics, climate change, and war have made us feel so disconnected and vulnerable,  regenerative agriculture has become a powerful force for positive transformation and hope.  Here, regenerative thought leaders share how agriculture and food design can create a more resilient system.  
**[0:00:52-0:01:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:00:52):**  Okay, well welcome everybody to the Regenerative by Design podcast. I'm Joni Kinlall-Moore, your host, and today we have Jeanine Zakasenner and Russ Zenner  joining us to talk about some really cool, novel, family-connected regenerative healthy food company collaboration.  And welcome you guys. Thanks for coming.  
**[0:01:15-0:01:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:01:15):**  Thanks for having us, Joni.  Thank you.  Yeah, yeah, this is great. So you guys aren't going to be able to see what I'm looking at, but I'm looking at Jeanine and Russ in the same room, which is fantastic.  
**[0:01:28-0:01:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:01:28):**  And today we're having a few little glitches where I'm going to be recording on different equipment, so bear with me.  If I seem to stumble a little, it's just because of technical stuff.  And we're going to talk about this really awesome partnership that has developed between Zakah Hummus and Zenner Farms.  
**[0:01:48-0:02:07](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:01:48):**  And so to get kicked off, I was just wondering if, Jeanine and Russ, if you guys could introduce yourselves, like who you are as far as your relation to one another,  and then we'll get into your businesses and how they work together in the second part.  So go ahead and take it away, Russ. Let's start with you.  
**[0:02:07-0:02:26](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:02:07):**  Well, I'm Jeanine's father-in-law, married to our son, Chris.  They live in Boise, Idaho, and our farm is in Genesee, Idaho, sort of the southeastern portion of the Palouse region.  We're on the breaks of the Clearwater River.  
**[0:02:26-0:03:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:02:26):**  But raised grains and pulse crops, and since Jeanine got into the hummus business, we've been using beans from our farm to supply her needs for making the hummus.  Anyway, it's been really exciting to see her business grow and it inspires the next generation on our farm to keep raising the garbs in a regenerative, sustainable manner.  And anyway, that's a rough overview.  
**[0:03:08-0:03:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:03:08):**  Yeah.  There's a lot more to the story, but.  Yes, there is. But that's a great starting point.  
**[0:03:14-0:03:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:03:14):**  So Russ, did you grow up eating hummus in Genesee, Idaho?  I did not.  And I was even on the USA Dry Pea and Little Council Board of Directors and Director of the Research Committee, and that was clear back in the 80s.  
**[0:03:33-0:03:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:03:33):**  And I don't know if we even knew of hummus then.  Yeah.  And actually garbanzos were only, they were started, they were started raising garbanzos in the Palouse in the very early 80s.  
**[0:03:52-0:04:06](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:03:52):**  We had one of our first crops in the mid 80s.  And so, yeah, it was it was long before hummus was.  Yeah, this is fairly recent.  
**[0:04:06-0:04:22](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:04:06):**  So Janine, it's fun because I've known Janine for a few years and I've just marveled at everything she does.  And she's just such an inspiring person.  And I love how this the rest of the story comes together through marriage to start with.  
**[0:04:22-0:04:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:04:22):**  So tell us a little bit about your background, Janine.  I don't think you grew up in Genesee, Idaho.  At least that wasn't the story I heard.  
**[0:04:29-0:04:49](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:04:29):**  So if you could tell us a little bit about like, you know, where you come from and your family and how you married into this family.  And then and then we can end at hummus. How hummus comes into the conversation.  Sure. Well, I grew up about 3000, actually quite a bit more than 3000 miles away from the Genesee area.  
**[0:04:49-0:05:03](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:04:49):**  So Kit, Russ's son, Chris, he went to grad school in Miami, Florida, which is where I was living and raised.  I was actually born and raised in Jamaica, moved to Florida in Miami.  And he went to grad school and that's where we met.  
**[0:05:03-0:05:18](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:05:03):**  He interned at a company I was working for after I had graduated.  And this, you know, Idaho farm boy charmed the hell out of me.  And I am Lebanese descent, grew up on hummus.  
**[0:05:18-0:05:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:05:18):**  We met literally within months, moved to Idaho, got married.  And that's kind of how the story began.  His mom, Kathy's center was shipping my mom, dry garbanzo beans from the farm and lentils every year since we got married to Miami from Genesee to Miami, just shipping it, you know, you postal service equipment every year for Christmas.  
**[0:05:42-0:05:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:05:42):**  And that's when she started making hummus with their dry garbanzo beans.  Yeah.  So yeah, with the mothers, the mother in laws are also involved.  
**[0:05:52-0:05:57](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:05:52):**  Exactly. Yeah.  Yeah.  Yep.  
**[0:05:57-0:06:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:05:57):**  Yep.  It started with the farm boy coming to Miami and ended up with the mother in law's, you know, shipping the beans and making it at home.  And it's our family recipe and their farm raised amazing garbanzo beans.  
**[0:06:09-0:06:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:06:09):**  So that's kind of how the connection started.  Yeah, that is so cool.  I don't, I haven't heard very many stories that started like this.  
**[0:06:17-0:06:33](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:06:17):**  You guys, I think this is a really like rare and special and fun kind of, you know, where the universe comes together to make amazing things happen.  So when did you first start thinking about selling hummus as beyond your family?  I'm sure your loved ones were hitting you up for all the time.  
**[0:06:33-0:06:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:06:33):**  Like Janine, we're inviting you over for dinner, but the caveat is, is you had to bring extra hummus.  Literally always.  That was definitely it.  
**[0:06:43-0:07:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:06:43):**  And I was, you know, back in the day when we first got married, I was opening up cans of garbanzo beans to make our hummus recipe.  And it wasn't until my mom came to my voicey kitchen and saw me open that can of garbanzo beans and yelled in her, you know, very sweet Arabic way, what the hell are you doing?  And why aren't you using the beans from the farm?  
**[0:07:05-0:07:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:07:05):**  And I said, well, because I don't want to soak, boil, cool and process. And she said, well, yeah, you do. Yeah, you do.  So she forced it on to me and we fought over the recipe and she said, well, it needs more lemon juice, more garlic, more tahini.  I said, no, it's good just the way it is. My friends all tell me how perfect it is.  
**[0:07:28-0:07:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:07:28):**  And she said, well, Janine, in her Arabic accent, they don't know what perfect is.  Yes.  So that's actually when Zach the Hummus really initiated, started because I changed my recipe, of course, when she left to her, to her, you know, specs.  
**[0:07:47-0:08:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:07:47):**  And then we really started actually making it for friends, family.  And then we started getting requests for big events and things like that. And I said, OK, I'm working at home as an accountant with three boys.  And I said, you know, I've got to figure this thing out. And it was the University of actually it was Chris, his sisters, Sandra, that introduced me to the University of Idaho Food Tech Center in Caldwell.  
**[0:08:09-0:08:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:08:09):**  OK.  Yes, it has. They have a literally a one day class called How to Start Especially Food Business. So I thought, well, that should be easy enough. Seventy five dollars back then.  So I took it. And based on that, I started experimenting in their kitchen with their team.  
**[0:08:28-0:08:55](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:08:28):**  It's a little bit R&D and we hit the farmers markets and the local markets. And that's how we got started over 10 years ago.  Yeah. Wow. That's a great, great story. I love it. And I love your hummus. And I'm one of those people that I've made a lot of hummus in restaurants.  I worked in a middle like a Levant inspired cafe when I was 18. And it really kind of changed my whole outlook on food.  
**[0:08:55-0:09:20](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:08:55):**  Growing up in rural Oregon, I clearly didn't grow up eating hummus in a Swedish family. It was not part of our cultural heritage at all.  And but my my mind was really opened. And, you know, I've been grateful to see hummus coming into the market because when you're in a hurry and you want something,  but I'm usually really underwhelmed by the product. And that's why yours is so different to me is it actually tastes like homemade hummus.  
**[0:09:20-0:09:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:09:20):**  It's it's a whole different thing. And you don't skimp on the things that make hummus so amazing.  Like the tahini. I agree with your mom. Most of the conventional ones out there, like the tahini is a mute point. Like, you know, you can't really taste it.  And I always find it to be really disappointing. And so I love how you guys have brought this forth and you have done a really good job growing Zaka hummus through, you know, pretty, pretty amazing, savvy business ways.  
**[0:09:50-0:10:15](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:09:50):**  And so how have you guys built this whole supply chain? Because, you know, I'm in the regenerative world, too, and I'm working to do pharma connected sourcing.  And my goodness, it is not the easy way to do it. It's seriously so much simpler just to call up your local commodities dealer and just say, Hey, ship me this.  I don't care where it came from. I don't care if it's sustainable, as long as it's cheap. And that is really food.  
**[0:10:15-0:10:37](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:10:15):**  You know, that's how the food business runs. And, and it's really tough when you're doing something different.  So tell me about how you guys have built this business structure where you're, you have Russ in the family growing the beans, harvesting them.  You know, you're probably not buying the entire harvest from them day one, you're probably figuring out some financial things that make that work out for both parties.  
**[0:10:37-0:11:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:10:37):**  I'd love to hear about that. Like, how have you done this?  So I'll just start out by saying, you know, my local commodity broker is calling up Russ and say, Hey, Russ, I need, you know, 20,000 pounds this year when we first started, right?  And he literally through his co-op was able to ship, drive down garbanzo beans to our production center in Caldwell. That was back in the day.  
**[0:11:05-0:11:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:11:05):**  Literally where he was driving bags of beans down from the farm in his truck to our facility or to my garage where I would ship it up to the kitchen.  And that truly hasn't changed much through the years other than we're doing truckloads shipping it to manufacturers in Chicago.  But that's just, you know, the fact that we are vertically integrated to the farm and we can do that puts us, you know, a step above most other manufacturers, like you said, that have to really go searching for it.  
**[0:11:34-0:11:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:11:34):**  So we're very happy to have that and that vertical integration. Well, we will always have as long as we have the farm.  And that's a commitment that Russ has always given us. And and we still have today with his cousin now running the farm.  But I'll let Russ kind of talk you through that farming side of that wonderful process that we have set up.  
**[0:11:56-0:12:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:11:56):**  Well, I guess the other, I guess, big component of this was the cooperation from Pacific Northwest Farmers Cooperative.  And at that point in time, Bill Newberry, the CEO of that company, he agreed to identity preserve designated to be in for our garbs at harvest.  And then did some early on some small runs of processing, just cleaning them and bagging them to to have in shape to ship somewhere to be processed into the hummus.  
**[0:12:31-0:13:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:12:31):**  But to this day, that still remains a significant component of the success of this is their cooperation. And it's just been wonderful.  That's fantastic. Bill has been very inspired by Janine's passion and was hoping that someday he would see something like this.  What has recently happened with her in, you know, we're just excited for her passion to stick with it.  
**[0:13:04-0:13:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:13:04):**  And I told her from the start, you got a very good product. Nobody else on the hummus shelf has your story as far as going from the farm to the shelf.  And are we had been involved in the very early phases of Shepherd's grain flour.  Our farm was one of the first handful of growers for Shepherd's grain flour.  
**[0:13:29-0:14:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:13:29):**  And again, that backing up, that was all about trying to cash in on the environmental benefit of the no till cropping system in the food chain.  And Shepherd's grain, we were involved in a lot of the promotion and that that started in about 2003.  So we've sort of been through this process with Shepherd's grain. And I could see, you know, I've been asked, did you ever expect this to happen?  
**[0:14:02-0:14:31](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:14:02):**  And my, you know, I'm not surprised because she's got such a great product.  And again, you know, even on the flour shelf now, there's a little more competition for Shepherd's grain as far as taking it to the grower.  But, you know, it's just it's just a function of persistence. A lot of hard work.  
**[0:14:31-0:14:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:14:31):**  Yeah. And yeah. And it's it's just so exciting to see what has happened with this Kroger thing. But yeah, that's along the way.  Yeah, absolutely. And I'm excited to talk about that in the market development piece, too.  But you brought up a couple of things that, you know, I think that we should elaborate on a little bit because I'm really familiar with Shepherd's grains team and their and their story and whatnot.  
**[0:14:59-0:15:41](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:14:59):**  And a lot of people don't realize how much of a shift has happened in agriculture over the last couple of decades where we had a very narrow focus.  And companies like Shepherd's grain, like Zaka Hummus have brought in a diversity of value to the field to kind of inspire farmers to be able to look for different crops that they can grow that are beyond just one or two commodity crops.  And and I think it's not to be understated how important all of these various players have been in kind of bringing more of a diversity to both farmlands and to the marketplace.  
**[0:15:41-0:16:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:15:41):**  You know, obviously, Shepherd's grain, especially with the focus on wheats. But, you know, when you look at what dominated the police in the 80s and as far as soft winter wheats that were being exported to Asia and then Shepherd's grain comes along and says, I think we should grow hard, hard wheats for bread.  I mean, that wasn't being commonly done at that time in the 90s, 80s and 90s.  And and when we look at how that impacted the whole, you know, ecological system of the police, which is a farming system, it's really bringing a lot of needed diversity into that system as far as I'm concerned.  
**[0:16:17-0:16:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:16:17):**  So I'd love for you just to talk a little bit about, you know, how that market has changed.  Like what you as a farmer, how is that impacting you?  Well, for me, I would say the last 15 years of my career, it was the motivation, the excitement.  
**[0:16:42-0:17:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:16:42):**  You know, farming was related to how can we perfect no-till farming? How can we get better at it?  You know, and the connection as a former commodity grower, and this started in Shepherd's grain, but the connection from the commodity grower to the consumer was an entirely new experience.  And that's the case for nearly all of the commodity growers in this country. Wheat growers, barley growers, even a lot of the pulse crops, just the commodity product and not trying to find areas where you can add value to that.  
**[0:17:24-0:18:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:17:24):**  And the exciting thing was that no-till farming was desperately needed in the Palouse region to curb water erosion implications to how we farm.  Central Washington, the wind erosion implications to how traditional farming was.  And it's just been the fact that you can communicate with consumers that are paying attention to how their food is grown and understand and appreciate how that is being done is powerful motivation to continue and to motivate Janine, you know, we're doing the right thing here, you ought to be able to sell this.  
**[0:18:08-0:18:45](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:18:08):**  Yeah, understanding that the small food producer entry into these big markets is very difficult.  Yes. Yeah, you bring up so many good points here. And, you know, as far as the next generation of farmers, like you said that it is it your cousin that is taking over?  Yeah, the next generation. I've had so many conversations with farmers about how they're really struggling to pass the legacy of the farm on and they're concerned about what's going to happen.  
**[0:18:45-0:19:08](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:18:45):**  A lot of the farms are being sold into private equity or, you know, ownership stake from overseas even because the younger generation doesn't want to just grow commodity.  They want to do if they're going to get into farming a they want a little more control over it and be they want it to be special.  You know, they want it to be something they can break about on social media and say what we're doing is high integrity.  
**[0:19:08-0:19:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:19:08):**  And we're connecting the consumers. I think people are craving that connection. So I'm really glad you took a moment to talk about that.  And Janine, how are you communicating this story to your consumers? I'd love for you to kind of take a moment and talk about how that is developing and how that that, you know, relationship is passing through from Russ all the way through to your consumer through the experience of your hummus.  Yeah. You know, that's the hardest part. Joni is getting the communication side out.  
**[0:19:40-0:20:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:19:40):**  But it's that leader. So, you know, back when we started it with this big local initiative, right? Everybody wanted local brands.  So you were able to literally walk into your local co-op and say, hey, I have a product. Are you interested in it? And they would say, yeah, sure.  You know, bring it in next week. It was literally that easy back in the day just to get your onesie twosie, you know, your local stores.  
**[0:20:02-0:20:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:20:02):**  Now, I think the consumer is actually requesting it and demanding it more. And so the opportunity to get into the larger retail have opened up because of that.  So it's not just a local initiative anymore. It is a, you know, truly a farm to table initiative. So people are demanding to know where their food comes from.  So with brands like ours that can actually show we have traceability to the farm, which is unique, but they're out there. Ours just might be unique to hummus.  
**[0:20:29-0:21:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:20:29):**  But they're actually getting a lot more support on the retailer side to bring those kind of brands in, you know, the natural, the organics.  But now it's really focusing on fresh and local. And, you know, just as an example with Kroger, this GoFresh and local initiative that they set out, it's consumer centric.  It's based on consumer demand. And it's their goal is to basically support brands like ours that are true to that initiative.  
**[0:21:01-0:21:32](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:21:01):**  And ours is one. And that's why we were placed up so high on that platform is because they really want to show that we're listening to our consumers where our decisions are being based on what consumers are demanding.  And they actually are paying attention to that. And that's just huge from where we were 10 years ago. You couldn't, you didn't hear that from retailers. I don't think retailers, you know, it's no fault to them.  I just think that it's just time, you know, and we are in the right time at the right place. And we just happen to be this far along to be able to do that.  
**[0:21:32-0:22:04](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:21:32):**  And, you know, saying that also, we wouldn't be here if it wasn't for our manufacturing partner that we have. We just back in 2018, we partnered with a company called Ivanka Foods in Chicago.  And they're a very large Mediterranean manufacturing company that was starting a hummus company and they, we partnered with them to launch.  If it wasn't for their, you know, expertise, their R&D team, what they brought to the table, we wouldn't be ready for a launch like this.  
**[0:22:04-0:22:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:22:04):**  So that's the other side that's really difficult for local companies to branch out of their local area as well is the R&D that's needed, the, you know, shelf life.  You know all about that, that it takes to do that. So combination of things is where we are today and we're just very fortunate to have had all of this happen at the time that it's happened and we're ready for it.  So it's a great story. I'm so thrilled by your success and what is happening. I want to be able to go to Fred Meyer and get DACA hummus because right now I can't get it.  
**[0:22:40-0:23:11](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:22:40):**  You will, you will in January. That's our launch date. And I got to tell you that I'm going to put in a plug and then I do want to just put in another plug for Albertsons.  But that Kroger team and this program that they have developed for this GoFresh and local accelerator cohorts, they are backing it up 100%.  I mean we just won at the end of August. We are scheduled to launch January, first week in January in three of their divisions. That's almost 300 stores.  
**[0:23:11-0:23:43](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:23:11):**  Their commitment is real. They've, we, you know, we meet weekly just to get the execution in line. So it's not just out there.  It's there. They're actually doing what they say they're going to do. And it's been an amazing experience. Nothing like we've ever had.  But my quick plug into Albertsons, hey, look, we wouldn't be here if it wasn't for Albertsons. We would not even be, you know, on a player if it wasn't for their 10 years ago willingness to launch a local brand that had 30 day shelf life.  
**[0:23:43-0:24:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:23:43):**  Our product was not even lasting on shelf and they said, no, you're local. We love you. We're going to support you. And through these 10 years, they have supported us fully, fully to get us to where we are.  Awesome. Yeah. Yeah. Good job. Yeah. Yeah.  For those of you who are listening and don't know, Albertsons has its headquarters in Boise, Idaho. So any of their banners, Albertsons, I mean, they have regional control, but the actual Albertsons headquarters is in Boise.  
**[0:24:10-0:24:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:24:10):**  So that's fantastic. When that walk and that talk come together, it doesn't always work out that way. I see a lot of, um, a lot of talk out there from retailers and sometimes I don't see the block that really backed it up.  You know, I see this and that's always frustrating. So when, when you do see retailers make that commitment and follow through, like you said with Kroger, like meeting weekly, making sure the executional milestones are being met.  Most people don't realize how many details come together to make a launch like this happen. It's, it's like all hands on deck. Hardcore.  
**[0:24:46-0:25:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:24:46):**  It is, it's a lot of work and preparation in it and it's exciting, but yeah.  Yeah. Yeah. And you have enough garbs from this year's harvest Russ?  Well, I guess we'll find out, but the other part of it is, uh, as Janine and Chris have communicated, a big part of the story was that our legacy in the family.  
**[0:25:09-0:25:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:25:09):**  Uh, with my grandfather coming from Luxembourg and starting all six of his boys farming in North Idaho, Fluce region. And now we have several zener farms in the region that are going to be our go-to suppliers, uh, if Clint can't produce at all.  But we'll come from other zener farms that are no-till farming and we've got a lot of production potential. So I know Janine's been asked about that, you know, with the Kroger potential volume, uh, you know, what can you supply?  We've got a lot of supply potential.  
**[0:25:48-0:26:09](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:25:48):**  Yeah. Joni, we're not even 25% of their production right now. So we're fortunate.  Yeah. Yeah. You realize how much is out there.  Yeah. Yeah. He said, he said long time ago, I wish that I'm hoping that that will be a problem for us when we run out of supply. So we're not there yet, but we're, yeah, exactly.  
**[0:26:09-0:26:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:26:09):**  That is the goal. It's funny. Like when, you know, when I'm talking to retailers and they're like, well, you know, you've got these pilots with these farmers, what happens if they, you use up all their grain?  I'm like, that is the best problem to have. Like if our biggest problem is that we're, you know, we need more farmers to grow for us. Like I'll know I've won. Right.  Like that's the problem I want to have because there are so many fantastic farmers out there that want to be growing in a, in a way that is regenerative and special.  
**[0:26:40-0:27:21](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:26:40):**  And I don't mean that to diminu it, you know, from a like a diminutive perspective, but it's special. Like they're like, Oh, what I'm doing really, really matters and I'm growing this crop the best I can using the best methods.  And that there's a gratification there that is really, really deep. All the farmers that I know and work with that, that's kind of what they want in life is they, they want to do good, honest work and they want to be compensated and they want to know at the end of the day, they made a difference.  So I love how it's all coming through the whole channel in this, in this particular case, it's a very unique story. Have you guys been able to tell this story in this set? Like, like this with both of you sitting down together many times before?  
**[0:27:21-0:27:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:27:21):**  This is the first time.  Probably the first time.  Yeah.  
**[0:27:25-0:27:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:27:25):**  No kidding.  I mean, we've had articles, we've had interviews, you know, separate interviews and articles written on both the farm and that product that's a hummus that we have not been able to sit together like this and we wanted Chris to be in on it too.  He did come in and say hi earlier, but we only have two AirPods.  
**[0:27:44-0:27:53](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:27:44):**  Oh, sure. I know that is, you know, it does make an issue.  Hey, if it wasn't for him, we wouldn't be here either one of us.  Yeah, no kidding.  
**[0:27:53-0:28:14](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:27:53):**  And Chris is such a fantastic guy. He's a cute farm boy and he's really fun and great and smart.  And he nailed the competition with me and Kroger. I mean, you know, I was full of dread and anxiety and he was full of, he described it as running onto the football field for the first time.  Nice. That's great.  
**[0:28:14-0:28:40](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:28:14):**  Yeah, yeah.  Well, I love that. It's a full family thing. So what's next for you guys? What are the plans for the future? Like, I know this Kroger focus is going to consume a lot of your time and energy right now.  And you do some work with food service in the Chicago area. Like once, you know, this Kroger wave is being ridden and you guys are looking for what's next.  
**[0:28:40-0:29:05](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:28:40):**  What is next for you guys? What other things are you looking at?  Well, I mean, right now, like you said, we're focusing on launching on production growth and managing distribution, right? So that's going to be a full 12 month process for us.  But we're looking at growing the food service side quite a bit more. We actually did launch with Delta last year. We have an ongoing contract with Delta.  
**[0:29:05-0:29:38](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:29:05):**  So yeah, we're trying to grow that a little bit more and just try to get out in different areas food service wise. We do actually have some strong partners in that.  So I think that's just got a lot of growth potential. Once we launch, like you said, once we're done with Kroger, we'd like to, you know, get into more divisions throughout the nation with between Kroger and Albertsons and try to get over to the East Coast.  You know, that in itself is going to take at least two or three years to cover. So with that, that's a lot of doors.  
**[0:29:38-0:30:10](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:29:38):**  And, you know, we want to stick with what we do well. We've always done that when we started. We started with a slow growth process and we're sticking to that because we know that you need to do something really well before you can venture on.  As far as, you know, R&D and product line development, we'd like to see a little bit more on that maybe on the snack side, creating a snack pack and maybe more flavors.  And we've always talked about doing something with the lentils. So this is a lot right now. It's short term is kind of managing our growth at this point.  
**[0:30:10-0:30:44](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:30:10):**  Oh, yeah, absolutely. That's a handful right there. I love I love all of your hummus, but I love the Mediterranean spicy one that has a good kick to it. It's just there's really nothing else out there on the market like that.  So and I was thrilled to learn that you can now order from your website. Yeah. shipping things that are perishable. I mean, that's like a whole nother adventure.  I was super excited when I heard that that was a that was a doable thing now because I just like I've said before, I'm always really disappointed when I buy hummus at the store. So yours is a game changer in that regard.  
**[0:30:44-0:31:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:30:44):**  Yeah. And well, this I love it that I've actually been able to get you guys in the same place in the same room to talk about this project. Now, Janine, you have kids.  Are your kids getting involved in this or are there other nieces and nephews that want to join on? Not right now. You know, we've got one out of college and he's in finance working for Goldman Sachs, so he's a little bit above my pay scale.  And then my other two are still you know, second year college and a first year in college and they're more into ones in construction management, the other ones in business, so we'll see.  
**[0:31:19-0:32:02](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:31:19):**  We'll see. But, you know, we did talk about the days when I had all three boys sitting around and cousins sitting around our kitchen table labeling tubs. I mean, that really was how we were paying a label price, you know, two cents per label per tub.  So they remember those days and that might make them not want to come back into the business. But right now, you know, actually, Chris is helping me a lot this year with our launches and stuff like that.  But as far as the kids, who knows, Janine? You know, they might pay attention now that we're going to be a little bit bigger than we were. So we'll see. Yeah, there's always potential.  
**[0:32:02-0:32:56](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:32:02):**  Time will tell. Just to follow up to the family aspect here. Everybody in our family, Janine's sister-in-law and her family, both sisters-in-laws, were involved at some point in time in setting up and manning farmers market booths, setting up the tents, dragging the coors.  And then, you know, after she started getting in stores, the in-store demos, you know, telling the story about the farm, those types of things. Yeah. A lot of support.  So we've all had a piece of the scene. Yeah. Everybody's had a hand in it. It really is like the American dream, you know, it's like that dream picture. People are like, yeah, and like the whole family's involved and like truly from soil to plate.  
**[0:32:56-0:33:27](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:32:56):**  It's amazing. And I think a lot of people are going to be inspired from the story and there's a lot to learn from it as well because it's a great demonstration of like how collaboration really does build strong businesses.  And it's part of this whole regenerative mindset where if you really believe in regenerative methods, collaboration is king in regeneration.  I mean, you're working with nature instead of against or trying to control it. You're working with other industry partners and it's like a collaborative process.  
**[0:33:27-0:33:52](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:33:27):**  And, you know, I think that there's just a lot we can learn about how we can transform agriculture in a resilient way into the future through what you guys have done and the model that you have proven works.  So, you know, what do you think people should do today to help bring more regenerative, you know, companies like this and more regenerative partnerships like this into reality?  What do you think consumers could do?  
**[0:33:52-0:34:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:33:52):**  People. Just general people.  Yeah, they need to ask for better products on shelf, more local products on shelf. And it's just basically just a demand. They just need to demand that they want to know where the food comes from and ask for these type of products from their retailers.  You know, and the social media is a perfect place for that, you know, to belong to that and to just support, really just to help support these local companies that are trying to do exactly what we're trying to do and just support them as much as you can.  
**[0:34:25-0:34:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:34:25):**  Yeah, Byron.  Yeah, definitely.  I would add that a little bit. I think more education, but I think the current environment of more global concern about climate change implications is expressing itself in food buying demand.  
**[0:34:42-0:35:13](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:34:42):**  But again, I think there's maybe more education at a younger age on the need to treat the planet better will transcend into food buying habits and, in my view, probably more research by individuals on what they're buying is also a big part of it.  Being motivated.  You know, our kids and grandkids read food labels that we never read a food label when I was growing up.  
**[0:35:13-0:35:28](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:35:13):**  Yeah.  Raised at home.  But just the entire demand process is changing in a manner that I think is reflecting, again, back to some of the climate change issues.  
**[0:35:28-0:35:50](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:35:28):**  Yeah. How are, you know, in your conversations with other farmers, what are you hearing from other farmers around that conversation?  Climate change being a major pressure, regenerative agriculture getting a lot of hype, especially with this recent USDA climate smart commodities bill.  What are you hearing and what are the conversations you want to have happening?  
**[0:35:50-0:36:47](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:35:50):**  Well, I guess there's a very slow shift, I think, in commodity agriculture has been dragging their feet on, I guess, addressing climate change issues simply because of a fear of more regulation.  This has been probably been the primary drag on that, and I think that is changing. It's just obvious with what the corporate world is doing to respond to consumers, to shareholders, and seeing what's going on around the world as far as environmental storm events and those types of things, the drought in the Southwest,  the global issues related to climate change is slowly transforming the vast majority of the production is in commodity crops.  
**[0:36:47-0:37:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:36:47):**  And we've got to get that shifted more in the direction, you know, this climate smart funding thing is going to be a big issue.  I think it's maybe going to have a pretty significant impact on commodity growers' views of all of this. So, it's a slow process.  But I can go clear back to when we started Shepherd's Grain was sort of an offshoot of the Pacific Northwest Direct Seed Association.  
**[0:37:16-0:37:59](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:37:16):**  When we founded that group to address basically environmental issues of topsoil loss, and that motivated us to start looking at marketing options, which Shepherd's Grain was an outgrowth of that.  If Janine's business has the success going forward, she's had, there's going to be a lot more interest in that. But it's been a long process.  Yeah, these things don't change overnight. Yeah, you just don't change whole landscapes and whole economies overnight. It's like bit by bit. It's a critical mass thing.  
**[0:37:59-0:38:24](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:37:59):**  And that's why, again, that focus on the consumers and, like you said, consumers have a whole new way of looking at food.  They're more curious than they used to be, the label reading and actually really wanting to know where it came from.  And that whole idea of provenance is especially after COVID with all these global supply chains being disrupted and people being fearful about where their food's coming from.  
**[0:38:24-0:38:48](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:38:24):**  I think it's just burning a whole rethinking of our food system, which was horribly needed before COVID.  And COVID just really made it exposed and made it have to happen really quickly. And then now with the pressures with the war in Ukraine and the pressures on input costs and stuff,  that's a whole other layer that I can't believe it's all happened in three years. I can't believe.  
**[0:38:48-0:39:12](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:38:48):**  But like Janine is experiencing, it's also opening up some incredible opportunities. I just hope that we continue to see more and more of these opportunities emerge  because foods like what you are doing is food for the future that will make us be able to feed a planet, a growing planet of people in perpetuity.  So thank you for all the work that you guys do. And where else can we find you?  
**[0:39:12-0:39:25](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:39:12):**  Like if somebody wants to reach out to you, Janine, or Russ, like, how can they follow you or how can they learn more? How should people reach out to you?  Because they're gonna have questions.  Well, you have to call Russ on his cell phone.  
**[0:39:25-0:39:42](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:39:25):**  Okay.  Yeah, you know, we're on Instagram, we're on TikTok now. Unbelievably so.  You know, we've got our website, you can contact us there. Facebook, I mean, we're on all of those platforms.  
**[0:39:42-0:40:01](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:39:42):**  We'll put those links to those platforms in the chat or in the information box below.  Well, click is a lot more tech savvy than I am as far as keeping up on that stuff. Although I have more time, but these books were more efficient than I am.  On the farm side, yeah.  
**[0:40:01-0:40:16](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:40:01):**  Tech native.  Yeah, definitely.  Well, cool. Well, I hope this just generates more curiosity. And if you're a retailer or someone out there, like, and you're trying to get in touch with Janine, reach out to me and I'll make sure you can connect it.  
**[0:40:16-0:40:29](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:40:16):**  Joni, I just want to say thank you for your part in everything that you're doing to get the message out and to share the importance of regenerative farming.  And we just, you know, you're doing a fantastic job yourself and you should get some accolades for that.  Thank you.  
**[0:40:29-0:40:34](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:40:29):**  Thank you. Thanks for having us.  I do appreciate that. Yeah, thanks for having us.  I'm a good at that, Joni.  
**[0:40:34-0:40:46](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:40:34):**  Oh, thanks Russ.  Yeah, we really appreciate your effort here and what you're doing, what you're committed to.  Fantastic. Well, I'll probably see you again this fall at the Spokane Farm and Food Symposium.  
**[0:40:46-0:41:19](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:40:46):**  Likely.  I'm going to be speaking again on the same topic I always am about how we how we create this category for regenerative crops and how we change the market so that more farmers that are doing it in a way that's sustainable can reach consumers and still have this story be told.  So if you're listening to this and you love this story, please share and share with your friends, share on social media, like and leave a review on iTunes, because it actually really does a lot to help spread the message and make brands like Janine's and Russ succeed.  
**[0:41:19-0:41:39](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:41:19):**  So thanks for joining us today and have a wonderful day.  Thank you for joining us on the Regenerative by Design podcast.  If you would like to learn more about the principles of regenerative food systems and agriculture, please see the show notes for links to education, a glossary and guest information.  
**[0:41:39-0:42:17](https://share.transistor.fm/s/d9416f66#t=0:41:39):**  This podcast was brought to you by Snacktivist, Inc., a leader in the regenerative food industry.  We create delicious foods from regenerative ingredients that are soil focused, minimize water use and maximize carbon sequestration, all while radically impacting human nutrition.  Learn more about our work at SnacktivistFoods.com  